
  Know Your Own Mind, Live
Your Own Life
You have a great potential for success, but
first you must know your own mind and live
your own life – then you will find and enjoy
that mighty potential. Become acquainted
with your inner self and you can win what
you want within a time limit of your own
choosing. Certain special techniques help
you win the goals of your dearest dreams,
and every one of these techniques is easily
within your power.
SOMEWHERE along the path of life, every
successful man finds out how to live his
own life as he wishes to live it.
The younger you are when you discover
this mighty power, the more likely you are
to live successfully and happily. Yet even in

later years, many make the great change –
from letting others make them what they
are, to making sure that they make their
lives to their own liking.
The Creator gave man the prerogative of
power over his own mind. It must have
been the Creator's purpose to encourage
man to live his own life, think his own
thoughts, find his own goals and achieve
them. Simply by exercising this profound
prerogative you can bring abundance into
your life, and with it know the greatest
wealth of all, peace of mind, without which
there can be no real happiness.
You live in a world filled with outside
influences which impinge upon you. You
are influenced by other people's acts and
wishes, by law and custom, by your duties
and your responsibilities. Everything you

do has some effect upon others, as do their
actions upon you. And yet you must find out
how to live your own life, use your own
mind, go on toward the dream you wish to
make real and solid. Know thyself, said the
ancient Greek philosophers, and this
remains key advice for the man who would
be in all ways wealthy. Without knowing
yourself and being yourself, you cannot
truly use the one Great Secret which gives
you power to mold your future and make
life carry you the way you want to go.
Let us then take off on our trip to Happy
Valley!
Do not think of me as a back-seat driver.
Rather, you are at the wheel and I merely
call your attention to a trustworthy road
map whereon the main highway is marked
beyond question. On your journey to riches

and peace of mind, the road grows
smoother and straighter as you travel.
Never believe you don't have what it
takes. Probably you are reading under an
electric light. You know that Thomas A.
Edison gave the first practical electric light
to the world. But did you know that Edison
was thrown out of school in the early
grades after his teacher decided he had an
"addled"

mind

and

could

not

take

schooling?
This then was the impact of another
person's opinion upon Thomas Edison – to
let him know with the voice of authority that
he didn't have what it takes to absorb even
a primary education!

Where would he have been if he had
allowed this directive to take charge of his
thinking?
Fortunately for him and fortunately for the
world, Edison decided to live his own life.
Through

early

adversity,

Edison

discovered something he might never have
learned through formal schooling. He
learned, first, that he had a mind he could
control and direct toward any desired end.
Then he learned he could use the technical
training of other men and successfully
direct scientific research even though he
himself never had been schooled in any of
the sciences. When he took full possession
of that "addled" mind it produced not only
the incandescent lamp but also one great
discovery after another.

A boy finds a friend and finds himself. I
too was nearly doomed by a false label of
unworthiness. I was then nine years old.
My mother had died a year before, and I
lived with relatives. To them and to my own
father I was a problem child who never
would accomplish anything save, perhaps,
what a life of crime can accomplish.
I was doing my best to live up to my
reputation as the successor of Jesse
James. I even had a six-shooter which I
had learned to handle like an expert. Then
a certain woman came upon the scene and
she changed my life. That woman was my
stepmother.
Long before she arrived, I had been
thoroughly conditioned by my relatives to
hate her. I found this very easy to do. She
arrived, and my father brought her to our

house where the relatives had gathered to
meet her. He introduced her all around. At
length he found me, where I stood in a
comer doing my very best to look tough.
"And here," said my father, "is your
stepson, Napoleon, beyond doubt the
meanest boy in Wise County. We don't
expect much good from him. I wouldn't be
surprised if he starts throwing rocks at you
by tomorrow morning."
At that moment, I believe my life hung in the
balance.
It was a wise and wonderful woman who
placed her hand under my stubborn chin
and raised my head so that she could look
me squarely in the eyes. She said only a
few words, but they lifted me onto an
entirely new level.

Turning to my father, my stepmother said
"You are wrong about this boy. He is not
the meanest boy in Wise County or
anywhere else. He is a very alert and
intelligent boy, and all he needs is some
worthy objective toward which to direct his
very good mind."
That was the first time in my life that
anyone had said anything good about me.
I straightened up, threw out my chest and
grinned. Then and there I sensed that "that
woman" who had come to take my mother's
place – as my relatives referred to her –
was one of those rare people who can help
others find the best that is in them.
That was the end of my six-shooter days.
Increasingly finding myself as I grew older,
I discovered my talent for writing. My
stepmother

helped

me

master

the

typewriter. With the aid of the typewriter I
became a writer for newspapers.
Through that experience I qualified to
interview successful men, and thus I came
to sit down with Andrew Carnegie.
Out of that interview – which ran on through
the better part of three days and nights –
came my commitment to search out the
secret of successful achievement, not
merely as a matter of words, but as a
pattern of definite action in the lives of men
who have achieved great wealth. Out of
this grew the organization of the Science of
Personal

Achievement

which

has

reverberated around the world, bringing
prosperity and peace of mind to millions of
men and women.

Great artists also live their own lives, or
they could not be great. One of the great
opera

stars

of

all

time,

Madame

Schumann-Heink, as a young girl went to a
music teacher to have her voice tested. He
listened

a

few

minutes,

then

said

brusquely "That's enough! Go back to your
sewing machine. You may become a firstclass seamstress. A singer, no!"
Remember, that was the voice of authority
speaking. The girl could have been
forgiven for deciding then and there that
she would never sing again. Yet she had
and kept possession of her own mind. She
became all the more determined that she
would learn to sing and to sing well. This
she did, and the world became richer. So it
has been with many another case in which
great personal talent might have been lost

forever if the possessor of that talent had
not felt it even when the "experts" said it
was not there.
Adversity? It's a tonic, not a stumbling
block! Every adversity carries the seed
of an equal or greater benefit. Very few
march straight to success without going
through periods of temporary failure and
discouragement. Yet when you are in
possession of your inner self there is no
such thing as a knockout blow. You may be
knocked down, but you can bounce right
back. You may detour on rough roads, but
you always can find your way back to the
paved highway.
You may think this applies only to simple
matters. Think, then, of the infinitely
complex

matter

of

winning

the

independence of a colonial territory – and

not only that, but of focusing the many
scattered influences which make sure you
become the country's first President.
In  I became the personal counselor of
Manuel L. Quezon. I not only counseled
him

politically

but,

perhaps

more

importantly, I taught him the Science of
Personal Achievement which then was
quite new.
Senor Quezon was the first President of the
Philippine Islands when they gained their
freedom. In , however, that time was
far in the future. The goal of freeing his
people possessed Quezon's mind, and he
saw himself as the first President of the
new nation. I assured him he could realize
both ambitions, yet we knew that such
great events do not come to pass
overnight.

There is a well-recognized power in setting
up a definite goal. Few, however, realize
the power of setting a realistic time limit in
which one intends to attain that goal. After
having counseled Senor Quezon for some
years, I induced him to set a definite time
limit for freeing the Philippines and
becoming the new nation's leader. I also
prepared an affirmation which he repeated
to himself daily. It closed with a statement
of this nature "I will allow no person's
opinion, no influence to enter my mind
which does not harmonize with my
purpose." Both the time limit and the
affirmation were of great help to Quezon in
knowing his own mind and keeping his own
direction in the face of the enormous
difficulties which beset him.

Twenty-four years and six months from the
day Quezon began to use the Science of
Personal Achievement, he became the first
President of the free Philippine Islands.
Coincidence?
Coincidence despite a world war which
intervened and many other factors which
were not foreseeable? I do not think it was
a coincidence, for I have seen this principle
of Personal Achievement work for so many
people in so many different situations that
coincidence must be ruled out.
We shall touch upon the principle again.
Right now I shall tell you about just one
man, presently doing business in Chicago,
who has used it with notable success.
W. Clement Stone was in high school when
he discovered his own goals, his own

direction in which the powers of his own
mind would take him. Soon he was selling
insurance at such a rate that he made more
money than his teachers. Today his fortune
is estimated at more than $ million and
it is increasing rapidly.
In , however, he faced disaster. At that
time he was the head of an agency,
representing a big casualty company,
which sold a special accident and health
policy. One day the parent company
"pulled the string" and terminated his
contract with two weeks' notice.
Mr. Stone did not have large reserves. It
was imperative to keep that contract going.
He spent forty-five minutes in refreshing his
contact with his inner self; then he decided
that within those critical two weeks he
would persuade the casualty company it

was against their own best interest to
terminate his contract. The company had
very cogent reasons for ending the
contract. Nevertheless, they did change
their minds as he wished them to and
Stone kept on marching toward his fortune.
He then decided that by  he would
own his own big health and accident
insurance company. By  he did. He
decided that by  he would have $
million dollars of his own. He did.
I heard recently that Mr. Stone has set up
a lifetime goal of $ million. I do not know
his deadline date, but I have no doubt that
on or before that date he will have the
stated sum; and further, that he will use a
good part of it as he always has used his
money – to benefit mankind. The concept
of $ million may frighten a man who

thinks small, but a man who knows the
secrets of Personal Achievement merely
says Why not?
A little while ago I made a survey for the
purpose of learning who were the ten men
who had made the most outstanding
application of the Science of Personal
Achievement in the United States.
W. Clement Stone was third from the top of
the list. The other two were Andrew
Carnegie, the sponsor of my twenty years
of research, and Thomas Alva Edison, the
greatest inventor of all time.
I met Mr. Stone for the first time in . It
was then that I began to unravel the
dramatic story of his rise to fame and
fortune, starting in business for himself with
only one hundred dollars in cash and a

copy of my most popular book, Think and
Grow Rich. I was so intrigued by the
effective application Stone had made of my
success philosophy that I accepted his
offer to help him take the Science of
Personal

Achievement

to

his

entire

insurance personnel.
The task covered ten years during which I
devoted all of my time to helping Mr. Stone
indoctrinate his entire organization with my
success philosophy. It was a tremendous
job, but it paid off in terms which proved
conclusively that my twenty years of
research under the direction of Andrew
Carnegie had uncovered a miraculous
formula for helping people to get from
where they were to where they wished to
be in life.

When I first began my association with Mr.
Stone, many of his top executives frowned
upon the alliance as being a waste of time.
They had never heard of a success
philosophy based upon what five hundred
outstanding men had learned from a
lifetime of experience through the trial and
error method, and they were naturally
suspicious of it.
Five years later these same executives met
with Mr. Stone and myself in a business
conference. To my great surprise Mr. Stone
arose and addressed himself to the group.
"Gentlemen," said he, "the Combined
Insurance Company of America is now
performing miracles." Then a long pause,
after which he said – "The company was
performing no miracles before Napoleon
Hill came here."

When I began my association with Mr.
Stone the annual premium income from
policy holders was around $ million, and
Mr. Stone's personal fortune was estimated
to be around $ million. When the
association was discontinued by mutual
consent ten years later, the annual
premium income of the company was
around $ million, and Mr. Stone's
personal fortune was estimated to be more
than $ million.
How much did I get from the association?
you may wish to ask. The cash I received
was negligible in comparison with that
which Mr. Stone received, but I was not
working for monetary reward; I was after
something far greater than that which could
have been gained by any amount of
money, for I had proved during those ten

years of association with Mr. Stone that the
Science of Personal Achievement could
perform miracles for those who embraced
it and made intelligent application of it.
More important still, I had laid the
foundation for the Napoleon Hill Academy,
which is now organizing and conducting
franchise schools for the teaching of the
Science

of

throughout

Personal
the

United

Achievement
States

and

eventually will reach throughout the free
world. The far-flung significance of these
schools

may

be

brought

into

understandable focus by the fact that the
Science of Personal Achievement has
turned out to be a perfect antidote for
communism;

something

I

had

not

anticipated when I began the organization
of the philosophy in . Which reminds

me that, truly, "man proposes but God
disposes."
It may well be that the Science of Personal
Achievement will become a strong factor in
neutralizing the cancerous evil known as
communism, which now threatens the
liberty of all mankind.
The Science of Personal Achievement is
already under option to a group of men who
are having it translated into Spanish for the
purpose of taking it to the people of all
Spanish speaking countries, starting with
our Latin-American friends of the South. I
plan eventually to have the philosophy
translated into all the major languages of
the world.
So, who is wise enough to say what I got
from my ten years of association with W.

Clement

Stone,

or

wise

enough

to

understand the hand of fate which brought
the two of us together?
The dramatic story of Arnold Reed.
Arnold

Reed

is

another

insurance

executive whose life story and its relation
to the Science of Personal Achievement
parallels that of W. Clement Stone. In many
respects his story, as it related to the
success philosophy, is more dramatic than
the Stone story.
Mr. Reed was a top-ranking life insurance
salesman, with a record of sales production
seldom equaled by anyone in this field. Mr.
Reed's sales started at around one million
dollars annually and pyramided upward far
beyond this amount. He was associated
with an insurance company headed by a

man whom he regarded as his personal
friend.
Unfortunately (or was it?) Arnold had not
read carefully the fine print of his contract
with the company, for he learned later that
it contained a clause which deprived him of
his renewal premium commissions, the one
factor in the insurance salesman's work
which gives him his greatest incentive to do
a good job.
This discovery shocked Arnold so severely
that he went home and went to bed,
refusing to eat or to communicate with his
friends. Doctors were called in to diagnose
his ailment but not one of them could find
anything wrong with him physically. It was
not his body that was sick, it was his soul,
for the shock he had experienced through
the perfidy of his friend had cut the line of

communication between him and the
source of inspiration which had made him
a great life insurance salesman; that
source which alone can make men truly
great!
Slowly but surely Arnold Reed was dying.
His ailment was one that no doctor could
cure. The doctors who had attended him
knew this and frankly admitted they could
offer no hope. Then a miracle happened. A
friend of Arnold's, who had long been a
student of my success philosophy, visited
Arnold and presented him with Think and
Grow Rich. "Here is a book," he told Arnold,
"which has worked wonders for me and I
want you to read it."
Arnold took the book, threw it on the bed
beside him and turned away without

comment. Hours later he picked up the
book, opened it and, lo! something in it
caught his eye and he read it through. Then
he read it again, and again, and on the third
time around he felt the surge of a power
which he readily recognized as one which
could bring him out of the dungeon of
despair into which he had fallen.
He got out of bed and began to write letters
to his friends who knew of his record as a
life insurance salesman, offering them an
opportunity to join with him in organizing a
life insurance company under the name of
Great

Commonwealth

Life

Insurance

Company. The friends responded quickly
and generously. The amount of money
needed was oversubscribed and much of it
had to be returned to the senders.

All of this took place at about the time I was
beginning my alliance with W. Clement
Stone. Now, some twelve years later, the
Great

Commonwealth

Life

Insurance

Company is one of the most successful in
its field, with a gross premium income of
over $ million in , and rapidly
increasing toward the new goal which
Arnold Reed has set at a billion dollars
annually.
The company is operating in a major
portion of the United States and it has a
sales organization of over four hundred
dedicated men and women who have
tuned in and drawn upon that mysterious
power that brought Arnold Reed out of the
shadows of death; and they are doing a job
that is without parallel in the insurance
industry.

The Great Commonwealth Life Insurance
Company conducts schools in many parts
of the country in which new recruits to its
sales force are trained. The first thing each
trainee receives is a copy of Think and
Grow Rich and a briefing on what this book
has done for Arnold Reed and the
company.
The last time I spoke to the sales
organization of the Great Commonwealth,
Arnold Reed marched onto the platform
holding me by the arm. He held up a copy
of Think and Grow Rich as he said, "My
friends, if it had not been for this book and
my dear friend here on my left, there would
have been no Great Commonwealth Life
Insurance Company and I would now be six
feet under the ground."

It was the shortest and the most dramatic
introduction I had ever experienced, and it
filled me so deeply with emotion that I could
hardly begin my speech.
Arnold Reed is a truly great leader of men,
as evidenced by the phenomenal record he
has

established

with

Great

Commonwealth. The main secret of his
leadership is his belief in what he is doing
and his sincerity in his relationship with his
associates, two qualities without which no
man may become a great leader at any
level of life.
A success-conscious mind functions
rapidly and effectively. In my hundreds of
interviews with men who had made
fortunes, I noticed how well their minds
were focused on success. Some of these
men were well educated. Some, for

example

Henry

Ford,

were

notably

uninformed in some areas of "school
learning." It never was the formal education
or the lack of it which gave these men the
power to use their minds with such drive
and effect, nor was it unusual intelligence.
What was it, then, which impelled their
minds to seize upon great goals, then
winnow all the circumstances of life and
make use of what could help them achieve
their

ambitions?

It

was

success

consciousness.
First you must know your own mind; then
you find success consciousness. When
Henry Ford mastered the art of making a
good, inexpensive automobile, he still went
on using his success consciousness. He
had to make sure his cars were well
distributed, and their sale pushed in every

part of the country. For this he needed
capital. The bankers had capital to lend, but
he did not want outside financial interests
to take hold of his company.
Ford's truly efficient mind showed him the
way to get the capital he needed even while
he built up his distributing organization.
First, he allotted his entire output of
automobiles only to distributors who held
the Ford franchise. Then he made it clear
that each distributor must accept a fixed
quota of cars, advancing in cash a
percentage of the purchase price before
the cars were delivered.
This plan made every distributor practically
a partner in the Ford business, yet it did not
affect Mr. Ford's control of the business.
Again, without affecting his control, it
provided him with the necessary operating

capital. Moreover, it provided his dealers
with a very definite incentive toward finding
a buyer for every car – actually the same
incentive they would have had if they had
been operating their own independent
businesses.
I have heard it said that this plan worked a
hardship on some of the Ford distributors.
Having known some dealers since before
the Model T car, however, and having
looked at today's record, I can say that
most Ford dealers are noteworthy for their
success.
Two bicycle mechanics, Orville and Wilbur
Wright, gave the world its first successful
airplane. What kept their minds clicking,
caused them first to build the world's first
wind tunnel, caused them to find a secret
of wingtip control which nobody else had

thought of? What caused them to surmount
limitations of material and of power which
still make that first flight look "impossible"?
First, they took control of their own minds
and their own lives; then they were guided
by the success consciousness which
always follows.
Is today's world different? Only in some
details. Take such a device as a memory
core, a tiny magnetic gadget which
operates by the thousands in many modem
computers. The Wright brothers did not
know of such things, nor did Henry Ford or
Andrew Carnegie or Thomas Edison. A
young man named Merlyn Mickelson, in
, looked at the rapidly dawning
computer age and saw what every age
offers – a need and a way to fill it. He
started to manufacture memory cores in his

basement. His first investment in tools and
supplies came to $.. His first employees
were friends and neighboring housewives
who "pitched in." Today, not yet forty, Mr.
Mickelson still makes memory cores. He is
President and  per cent owner of a $million-year company, and the company
stock he holds is worth about $ million.
Can success consciousness be instilled
into a mind already filled with a record
of failure? When you come to know your
own mind and live your own life, you can
wipe out a record of failure just as surely as
you can erase the message on a tape
recorder, leaving a wonderfully receptive
tape – or mind – to receive new and better
impressions.
Some people have been able to do this for
themselves. Others need help. I well

remember a man I helped to find himself.
As you will see, I got him started and once
he knew where he was going, he did the
rest.
This was a dead-broke man just out of the
Army. I believe he used the Army as a
refuge, but eventually he was back in
civilian clothes, looking for a job. The mere
mention of "hard times" seemed to be
enough to flatten him. He was shabby. He
was hungry. He was willing to settle for
crumbs if only he could get them.
He came to see me about finding work. At
the outset he announced "All I want is a
place to sleep and enough to eat." A place
to sleep and enough to eat – in a world that
throbs with riches! Something prompted
me to ask "Why settle for a meal ticket?
How

would

you

like

to

become

a

millionaire?" He looked at me with glassy
eyes, swaying. "Please don't joke with me."
"I assure you I'm serious. Every man has
some kind of assets, and every man can
tum his assets into a million dollars or many
millions if he uses them correctly."
He sighed. "What do you mean by assets?
I have a nickel in my pocket."
"Bring your mind around to the positive
side," I said, "and you have the most
important asset you'll ever have. We'll work
on that. Now let's take inventory of your
skills. Sit down, we'll talk better. What did
you do in the Army?"
He had been a cook. Before going into the
Army he had been a Fuller Brush
salesman. He was a good cook, I
discovered, but obviously he had not been

a good salesman. Still, he knew something
about selling and in talking to him, I
discovered he still wanted to sell. At the
outset, however, he had no belief he ever
could become a good salesman. The
memory of past failures inhibited him, and I
had to help him break those self-inflicted
mental blocks and see, not what he had
been, but what he could be.
We talked for some time and meanwhile
my own mind was busily at work. My mind
was

not

weakened

by

hunger

and

hopelessness. There had been a time
when my mind had known as much despair
as did his; but now I was filled with success
consciousness.

Questing

about,

my

uninhibited mind remembered that special
new kinds of cookware were now being
developed. A new kind of cookware of

great benefit to the housewife – a man who
could think about cooking and even
demonstrate – a man who could be made
into a good salesman – and there we had
the winning combination.
"Suppose you represented a company that
makes a new kind of aluminium cookware,"
I

said. "This cookware offers many

advantages. It should be seen in action;
then it will practically sell itself. Any
housewife, for a small consideration say,
some free pots or pans for her own use –
should be glad to invite her neighbors in for
a home-cooked dinner. You cook that
dinner with the special cookware, and after
dinner you take orders for complete,
matched sets. If twenty ladies are present,
I'm sure you could induce half of them to
purchase. Some of these would be eager

to run similar dinner parties in their own
homes. The business would become selfperpetuating."
"Sounds okay," my young soldier friend
replied. "But where am I going to sleep
meanwhile?
And where am I going to eat? And where
am I going to get a few clean shirts and a
new suit? Not to mention the question of
where I am going to get some money or
credit to get started on?"
Such questions are typical of the mind
which does not yet know itself, and so
sums up all the obstacles rather than
looking directly at the goal.
"Get yourself into the right frame of mind,"
I said, "and you will either find what you
need or find a way to do without and still

achieve your goal. When your mind can
truly picture a desired goal, and feel
success consciousness driving it toward
that goal, you can win that goal. Let us put
aside all other matters and investigate your
state of mind."
Actually, the young man was very close to
having the desired positive state of mind. I
waited till I was sure he had it, however.
Then I said he was a good risk, and I gave
him the use of our guest room, and his
meals. I let him use my charge account at
Marshall Field's so that he could be well
dressed. I guaranteed his note for his first
outfit of cookware.
During his first week he cleared nearly one
hundred dollars in profit. The second week
he doubled that amount. In a little while he
began to train other men and women,

whom he managed. Most of all, he instilled
in them the success consciousness which
now had full hold of his mind, and as they
prospered, so did he.
At the end of four years, the young man
who had been so hungry and brokenspirited, so very far from being a millionaire,
was worth more than four million dollars.
Moreover, his newly keen and efficient
mind had perfected a home-demonstration
selling plan which now nets millions of
dollars annually to a large corps of
salespeople.
When the bells of heaven ring with joy.
When a man finds his own mind and fills it
with successful consciousness, or when
another man helps him do so, I fancy that
the bells of heaven ring with joy. Here is

one more soul who has broken the chains
forged by his fearful imagination.
Now you can see why I chose to begin this
book by revealing what it means to take
possession of your own mind, live your own
life, find your real self that has no
limitations. When you do this you have an
asset worth whatever values you choose to
make it worth.
Think again of what is involved in creating
an independent nation. Think of ancient
India with its teeming millions, under British
rule for generation after generation. Think
of the Mahatma Gandhi, a man who had no
money, controlled no army, did not own a
house, did not even own a pair of pants.
Yet he had an asset which was greater
than all the might of the British Empire – the
capacity to take possession of his own

mind and direct it toward purposes of his
own choosing. He chose to free India, and
he lived to see the achievement of his
purpose.
Thanks to the influence of Mahatma
Gandhi,

my

Science

of

Personal

Achievement now has many millions of
followers in India. Whether your goal is
money, the well-being of others, or a
combination of these – as well it may be –
know that there is nothing beyond the
power of a mind that knows itself and
believes in its own capabilities.
The spiritual defenses within the castle
of your mind. I have purposely used the
word "defenses" in order to call your
attention to its varying meanings. A mind
that is "on the defensive" is not an open
mind. It is more likely to be a frightened

mind, full of excuses and evasions, and
hardly capable of lifting its possessor's
eyes to the far horizons of accomplishment.
In speaking of spiritual defenses, then, I
speak of nothing that is negative
rather I speak of certain areas within which
one may withdraw and thus become more
completely oneself.
Every successful person I have known has
surrounded himself with these spiritual
defenses in one way or another. I adopted
the system and have found it invaluable.
Here is how it works.
Consider your mind to be laid out in the
pattern of some medieval castles. At the
center there is a tower, or "keep," which is
impregnable as it can be made. Going
outward from the keep you would come to

a wall not so formidable; and again going
outward you would come to another wall
which serves as the first line of defense.
A person approaching the castle first would
have to pass the outer wall. This wall of
spiritual defense in your mind need not be
very high. Anyone who has a legitimate
excuse for entering your mind with his
ideas can climb this wall. If he does not
have a legitimate excuse, however, the wall
discourages him. When you set up such a
wall, others come to know it is there and
you give yourself a valuable protection.
A person who passes the first line of
defense now confronts the second line
which you may set up on certain occasions
and not on others. When your mind sets up
this wall, nobody may climb it unless that
person has something strongly in common

with

you,

or

something

importantly

beneficial to share with you at that moment.
The inmost castle of protection is the most
important of all. It is small, barely big
enough to surround you, but when your
mind retreats within that keep it is removed
from every outside influence. With me, only
the Creator can penetrate my inmost
spiritual castle. Find yours and you find a
source of great strength. Here is where you
can find your inmost thoughts, undisturbed
by outside influences; and until you find this
castle you never can know them. Here is
where you can search all the values of a
problem

and

find

a

solution

which

otherwise you might not see. Here,
especially, is where your fully possessed
mind reveals what can be done – and when

you come out of your retreat you know that
it will be done and that you will do it.
At first you may find it necessary to retreat
physically from the world into a quiet room
or perhaps to some place distant from your
business and from people who know you.
This often is a good idea even when you
have practice in finding the most inmost
privacy of your mind, because there are
many physical circumstances which break
into thought.
When you have several times retreated to
your thick-walled keep, however, you will
find you can enter it for a few seconds even
in the midst of others who are talking all
around you. I have seen many successful
men do this, and thus illustrate some of the
power to which they owe their success. It is
a great renewer of the spirit, a kind of

recharge of ability and selfconfidence and
abiding faith.
All that I have to say in this book is keyed
to one Supreme Secret.
This Secret has been strongly sketched in
throughout this chapter. You have seen it,
and already it is beginning to penetrate
your subconscious mind – which never
forgets.
Checking on  
Never believe you don't have what it takes.
A man who succeeds in life must know
where he is going, must fully possess his
own mind and believe with full faith that this
is it. Knowing this, he can shunt aside any
outside influences which may attempt to
discourage him. Even the "voice of
authority" speaking to a child cannot prevail

against a mind that knows itself. Even a
child who is a potential criminal can be
directed toward an honest and successful
life when you show him his own vast
potential for making good.
Adversity? It's a tonic, not a stumbling
block
Life

often

brings

hardship

and

discouragement, but a mind that knows
itself

becomes

filled

with

success

consciousness that never is lost. You can
help yourself by setting up a time limit
within which you will achieve great goals.
Even an unforeseeable world war did not
prove a great enough obstacle to prevail
against this mighty Personal Achievement
technique.

A

success-conscious

mind

functions

rapidly and effectively
Once you fill your mind with your selfdirected

success

consciousness,

you

achieve a level of mind efficiency which
does not depend on formal education.
Seeing your preferred goal ahead of you,
you are magnificently able to find ways to
get what you want. For a pioneer of the
automobile age or a pioneer in the
construction of modern computer parts, the
principle which makes your mind work
rapidly and effectively is always the same.
Can success consciousness be instilled
into another's mind?
Even the most discouraged and beaten
man can have all his success potential
revived when another mind, full of success

consciousness, evokes the same great
power in his. Belief in success, not in
obstacles to success, can spread from one
mind to another until millions share the
same great goal.
The spiritual defenses within the castle of
your mind
Within your own mind you can set up three
spiritual walls which are stronger than
stone. Within these walls your mind can
know itself and be itself – and still absorb
all the good, constructive influences you
wish to bring in. You will be proof against
unwanted

negative

influences,

time-

wasting and the like. Within your innermost
wall you will always have the means to
renew your spirit, recharge your confidence
and faith.

  Close the Doors on Your Past
Whenever you meet a misfortune, put it into
your past. Keep your mind upon future
achievement, and you will find that
mistakes of the past often work to fill the
future with good fortune. Your wealth and
your peace of mind are strongly connected
with each other. Even at the lowest-level
jobs, your success waits within your own
mind. Add value to your work and you set
in motion the forces that make the concepts
of your mind turn into the realities of living.
WHEN I was still a poor youth in Wise
County, Virginia, I invested twenty-five
cents in a raffle ticket. The prize was a
horse – and I won! A horse was of
considerable value to a farming family in
those days, and this one, all agreed, was a

good horse. Filled with pride, I led him
home. How fortunate I was!
Or was I? Having installed my horse
carefully in the stable, I treated him to oats,
corn and hay – all he could eat. That same
night he broke out of the stable, went down
to the river and drank his fill of water. As
anyone who knows horses could have
predicted,

the

poor

bloated

animal

foundered and died. It cost me five dollars
to have him hauled away and buried. So
much for my good luck!
Yet who can tell the uses of the past? I was
able in later years to look back upon that
incident and see I had been fortunate. You
see, I never again have been tempted to
risk money in any kind of gambling. Surely,
I have saved the cost of many horses, let
alone saved my peace of mind.

Now let me tell you of a more serious
incident which cost a man's life, threatened
my own life, prevented me from taking
advantage of a great opportunity, seemed
like an unmitigated disaster – and yet
turned out to be for my boundless good and
the good of others as well.
At that time, I had completed the first draft
of The Science of Personal Achievement,
in eight volumes, and I needed a publisher.
Mr. Don R. Mellett, publisher of the Canton,
Ohio Daily News, became my partner and
business manager. We induced Judge
Elbert H. Gary, Chairman of the Board of
the United States Steel Corporation, to
supply the money necessary to print the
first edition. Furthermore, Judge Gary
agreed to purchase a complete set of the
books for every key man employed in that

vast corporation. The contract had not yet
been signed, but I was on top of the world.
Now, Mr. Mellett had been using his
newspaper as a means to expose a very
unholy alliance between the bootleggers
and the police force of his city. Three days
before we were to meet Judge Gary, a
member of the police force and a gangster
shot and killed Don Mellett. Because I had
been associated with him, the gang
believed I too had had something to do with
their exposure. I missed assassination by
only a few hours.
For a year I had to hide. At length the
murderers were caught, convicted and
given lifetime sentences in prison.
Meanwhile Judge Gary had died. All my
plans were upset, I had had to waste much

precious time while in hiding, and I had no
publisher. I was right back where I had
started – or rather, I was behind where I
had been.
I made a new start and found a publisher
for my writings. That is a story in itself, but
it is not the point of this story.
I found out later that if Judge Gary had
become my financial backer, and if The
Science of Personal Achievement had
been distributed within the United States
Steel Corporation as had been planned, I
would forever after have been looked upon
as a tool of Big Business. The Science of
Personal Achievement would have been
greeted with suspicion, would have been
turned down cold by many of those whom
it now serves. Furthermore, I might have
been inhibited against making statements I

have made from time to time against Big
Business when it forgets its real purpose,
which is to be build a better world for
mankind.
Every adversity has within it the seed of
an equivalent or a greater benefit. Can
you remember that? Write it on a card.
Carry the card in your pocket and read it
daily! In that phrase lies the key to many a
man's peace of mind. It is not the Supreme
Secret to which I have referred but it lives
on the same street. Set it firmly into your
consciousness Every adversity has within
it the seed of an equivalent or a greater
benefit.
Thus, it is possible, and strongly advisable,
to CLOSE THE DOORS TO YOUR PAST
insofar as any regrets or bitterness or postmortems

are

concerned.

You

are

searching for wealth and peace of mind.
Neither the way to wealth nor the way to
peace of mind leads through the graveyard
of unpleasant experiences long past.
When you have attained peace of mind,
your mind will automatically reject every
thought and every mental reaction which is
not beneficial to your welfare. Meanwhile,
help yourself attain this great command-ofmind and all it can do for you. Avoid all
negative mental influences and especially
avoid that shadow of mournful regret which
can keep all the sunshine out of your life –
and keep out other gold as well.
Time is the great magician. Close the
door on ugly experiences, disappointments
and frustrations! Then the great magician,
Time, can transmute past sorrows and

mistakes into present rewards, success
and happiness.
Knut Hamsun, a Norwegian immigrant,
failed at everything he tried in this country.
In desperation he decided to write the story
of his struggles. His book, which he called
Hunger, won the Nobel Prize for literature.
Hamsun's terrible experiences at length
had made him a rich and famous man.
Harry S. Truman failed as a haberdasher.
If, from then on, he had considered himself
a failure, he certainly could not have
entered upon the road to the presidency.
We have also the example of another man
who took up store keeping; but the store
failed.

He took up engineering and also failed. The
sheriff sold his surveying instruments to
pay his debts.
He joined a group of soldiers in an Indian
war and had the rank of captain. His record
as a soldier was so poor that he was
reduced to the rank of private and sent
home.
He was passionately in love and engaged
to be married. The girl died and left him in
a terrible state of shock.
He took up law. He won few cases.
He went into politics, ran for office and was
defeated.
Is it astonishing that Abraham Lincoln
eventually became President? In a way it is
and in a way it is not. He might have
allowed his mind to drag failure and

discouragement after him, as a prisoner
drags his chains. After all, so many people
do, and they are indeed prisoners of the
past, never able to break free of the image
of failure which, to them, means me.
He did not do this, however. The way in
which he determinedly left failure behind
him was no miracle – it is a grand privilege
available to every human being. The man
who became President had been tempered
in the fires of life, or he could not have been
what he was nor have done what he did.
You cannot see all of the great Plan of your
life. You can make it full and rewarding,
however, if you treat each sorrow and
setback as a tempering toward greater and
richer experiences to come.

Let me suggest Keep yourself aware of
life's

endless

combinations

of

circumstances.
Have you been disappointed in love? Your
heart feels literally broken. You can see no
joy in the world. You may wish to take an
overdose of sleeping pills and end it all. Yet
is it likely that nowhere in the world exists
the woman (or man) who can take the
place of the one you lost? A moment of
thought within the citadel of your deepest
mind will show you this is hardly possible.
So it happened with me, for after a dreadful
disappointment of the heart I met a
combination of circumstances which led at
last to the perfect wife. There is a more
poignant point to the story. When, after a
violent lover's quarrel, my first sweetheart
turned away from me, married another

man, I thought the world had ended. Five
years later the man she married committed
suicide, unbalanced by the constant friction
of living with the woman I had been so
anxious to marry. Where would I have been
with a terror of a woman who heckled me
instead of helping me?
Every adversity has within it the seed of an
equivalent or greater benefit.
Remember that even a condition which the
world calls HANDICAP you can call
BENEFIT – and make it truly so.
I have mentioned that Thomas A. Edison
had little formal schooling. W. Clement
Stone, the highly successful insurance
man, was a high school dropout.
So many men have succeeded despite the
lack of "book learning" that, without in the

least downgrading education, we may say
the lack of it need not be a handicap. It
depends on the man.
But what of Edison's deafness? Surely a
very marginal ability to hear is a handicap.
But again, it depends on the man.
Edison as a boy had been a "candy
butcher" on trains. Once a man lifted him
and his entire load of candy onto a train by
his ears – and that was the beginning of the
end of his hearing. He could have dwelt all
his life on this cruel and damaging
experience. Like many others, he could
have put his major energies into bewailing
his fate; but he didn't.
When I visited him, he was dependent
upon a hearing aid a primitive thing by
today's standards. When I was sure we

understood each other's minds, I asked
him if he had not found his deafness a great
handicap. He replied
"To the contrary, deafness has been a
great help to me. It has saved me from
having to listen to a lot of worthless chatter
and it has taught me to hear from within."
Anyone who wants peace of mind should
remember those last three words. By
transmuting his affliction into a benefit, Mr.
Edison learned how to tune in on all the
subtle power which waits within every
mind. He felt, too, that he heard, from
within, the voice of an Infinite Intelligence
and received guidance from an infallible
Source.
Every adversity has within it the seed of an
equivalent or greater benefit.

When you speak of failure, you attract
failure. When you speak of success, you
attract success. I once made a survey of
more than , men and women to
ascertain their staying qualities in the face
of failure and defeat. For the majority of
those people, it took one – only one
setback to wed them to defeat.
Of those who kept on aspiring, another
large percentage got started in various
projects but quit even before meeting with
defeat.

The

defeat

came

not

from

circumstances but from the built-in attitude
of defeat which they carried from the past.
Instead of closing the door on the past, they
ran back through that door at every
opportunity. Needless to say, there were no
Fords or Edison’s in this group.

On the other hand, I am reminded of a man
named Arthur Decio who built his career
out of a family failure that had cost all of his
father's savings. It was a business in
mobile homes which never got going. Now
the father handed it to the son, hopelessly.
What could Decio, then in his twenties, do
with the business? Most men would have
liquidated it on the spot.
Starting in his garage next to the railroad
tracks in Elkhart, Indiana, Mr. Decio first
designed a small, easily transportable
mobile home which research had shown
him was needed. Later he applied General
Motors methods in a business which never
had known them before. He introduced
frequent model changes. He built a network
of dealers. He brought out four lines of
mobile homes, each competing with the

others. His company's sales in four years
have increased  per cent, and Mr.
Decio has made five million dollars out of
the business that was about to fail.
Today's

population

includes

a

large

proportion of young marrieds and retired
couples,

both

groups

being

prime

customers for mobile homes. Of course,
Mr. Decio realizes this, for every age has
its special ways.
The many failures who turned up in my
survey of some years ago displayed a
failure-quality which belongs to any age.
Not only had these people failed, but they
kept on living with their failure. They spoke
of it in preference to other topics. They lived
in the past tense, reliving the pain of what
had been.

Those who had succeeded, however,
spoke in the future tense. Their eyes were
not upon their past – which often contained
a good share of mistakes – but ever upon
the future, upon their great objectives. This
too was the invariable case with those five
hundred and more vastly successful men
whom I interviewed at the behest of
Andrew Carnegie. On their way up they
talked "the way up." Where failure had
been laid behind, failure stayed behind –
and

notably

it

stayed

out

of

their

conversation.
Concerning success and failure, I have
observed another trait which has much to
do with peace of mind.
It is obvious that those who are filled with
malice and envy do not have peace of
mind; their malice and envy sour their lives.

Failure so often hates the very sight of
success. Speaking with successful men, I
have noticed they speak in complimentary
terms of other men who are succeeding.
Their attitude is not one of envy, but of
willingness to learn from others. The
failure, on the other hand, goes out of his
way to find some adverse criticism of the
successful person. If he can't find anything
doubtful about the way that person does
business, then he will pick at some other
area. His malice is evident, and so is the
sad fact that he not only cannot command
what money can buy, but also, he cannot
attain peace of mind.
Is there a definite connection between
being wealthy and having peace of
mind? There is a connection, but it is not
absolute. There certainly are poor people

who have peace of mind; but they are far
rarer than folklore would have us believe.
You need not be a millionaire, but without
sufficient money you are cut off from much
in life that sustains the spirit. If you are
continually worrying about where your next
meal is to come from – when you'll be able
to get your shoes repaired – how you are
going to pay your dentist bill – how many
more years your house can go without
paint – you have no peace of mind. If your
lack of funds forces you to live in a shabby
neighborhood so that you constantly worry
about the influence upon your children, you
have no peace of mind. If you cannot
occasionally buy and cherish something
that is beautiful – if you cannot afford a
vacation, you really enjoy – if you cannot
partake of a motion picture or a stage show

which you know is very much worthwhile –
your mind does not have the chance to
satisfy itself. Money brings much good into
your life and much that nobody should have
to do without.
It is no surprise that there are many rich
people who enjoy peace of mind. But there
are many who do not. If the main purpose
of a fortune is to make its possessor worry
about keeping his fortune, peace of mind
goes out the window.
One of the failures which have illuminated
my knowledge and strengthened my soul
came when I was quite wealthy. I simply
became

poor

–

quite

poor.

The

circumstances are revealing.
Perhaps as a compensation for the dirtpoor days of my youth, I became enamored

of big houses, big cars, lush acreage and
similar symbols of wealth. Perhaps I was
merely in line with my times, which seemed
to demand that when a man had money, he
had to display it.
Today's

millionaires

are

much

less

ostentatious.
At any rate, my books were selling well, I
had made a name as a trainer of salesmen,
other enterprises prospered – and so it
seemed imperative that I must drive a Rolls
Royce. Soon I had a pair of Rolls Royces.
Soon after this, I cradled my cars in a big
garage on a large estate in the Catskill
Mountains, north of New York City. I saw
that estate as a monument to my
achievements.

The estate called for servants, for a
maintenance staff, for foremen over the
maintenance men. It called for lavish dinner
parties, the expense of which would have
made John D. Rockefeller groan. Once I
gave out a general invitation to a barbecue
dinner, expecting that perhaps a hundred
people

would

show

up.

Over

three

thousand attended! The highway was tied
up with a traffic jam for two miles each way,
and the traffic patrolmen never did forgive
me.
The clubhouse on the estate could sleep
forty guests in comfort and was seldom
without a full load. Once the overflow swept
into my private quarters. I arrived home –
hoping for some peace of mind – and found
a stranger asleep in my bed.

Moreover, he had appropriated the only
pair of pajamas I had available.
Let us draw the curtain on the Hill estate. It
went for a song shortly after the crash of
'. When I got over the initial shock, how
relieved I felt! How peaceful, how newly
powerful was the mind which had been
overlaid with worry!
Three of my friends, whose combined
assets were less than the amount I lost
when I lost my estate, did not have faith in
the great principle that every adversity has
within it the seed of an equivalent benefit.
One jumped off a high building on Wall
Street; one fired a bullet into his brain; and
the third man was hauled out of the Hudson
River six weeks after he had jumped in.

I made money again. Of course I did. The
principles of the Science of Achievement
saw to that. My lost estate had not lost with
it my knowledge that any goal set up by a
human mind can be achieved by that
mind's possessor. Ever since, I have lived
comfortably but without show. What good
is money when it becomes a millstone?
Make sure your work and your money
benefit someone besides yourself. One
of the positive results that came after I had
firmly closed the door on my experiences in
the Catskill Mountains was this I found
time in which to write more books. These
books have benefited me, and they have
benefited mankind – and so they have
benefited me with more than money.

When Andrew Carnegie decided to use his
great wealth to found free libraries, he
greatly increased his peace of mind.
Henry Ford was pretty tough about giving
away his money. When at length he
learned it was possible to find people who
deserved it and would use it well, I am sure
he felt the same quiet satisfaction.
There is another important principle which
insures that as your wealth grows, so will
your peace of mind.
Do not hurt any other person in order
that you may succeed. I am thankful I
learned this early in life. When a man
discovers himself and with it the ways in
which he can earn big money, now and
then he will see a way to put some extra
weight on his side of the scales. Like the

butcher's hand which is weighed along with
the hamburger, it wouldn't be noticed. I
could have added to my wealth by
dishonest means on many an occasion, but
I would have lost my peace of mind.
Among the men I interviewed after I
accepted my commission from Andrew
Carnegie were several who were little
better than pirates of the business world.
(In most cases I did not know this at the
time). Later events often showed how
much they had given up when, in effect,
they stole from others or ruthlessly ruined
others in order to aggrandize themselves.
Some went to prison. Some stayed out of
prison on legal technicalities, but who has
peace of mind when no honest man will
look him in the face?

Today is the day of the large service
corporation, often with a tremendous office
staff. A man in a factory is likely to be
judged by the kind of work he puts out, but
a man in an office can push himself upward
with various tricks of personality, tricks of
paperwork, tricks of getting the other fellow
to assume responsibility for mistakes, and
so forth. To step up the ladder by stepping
on another man's face is to make a
mockery of the money you earn. There is
no peace of mind in this and often there is
no health, no ability to be happy, no
harmony at home. You can be left with the
ability to buy what money can buy – and a
degree of unhappiness rather more acute
than a beggars.
I have spoken to several men in my classes
who confessed they had cut many comers

of honesty and business morality. Now they
wished to make a new start – but was it
possible? When they attained the only true
wealth, honestly earned wealth, would they
not still be made miserable by the tensions
of guilt?
I assured them they would not if only they
closed the door on the past. Let them
consider dishonesty a mistake, even a
disaster – but a past disaster.
This is an important point with many
ramifications. Not necessarily dishonesty,
but also any other negative state of mind
held in the past can be left in the past just
as one leaves physical circumstances.
I showed these men that now they were
finding a new self. The past could not
matter.

The world is full of examples of men who
learned from their own bad consciences, or
even in prison, that no dishonesty ever
pays. The lesson learned is the lesson
learned, and for most men there is time
enough and world enough to start again
and build a glorious future.
For an exception, I give you Al Capone.
During

the

Great

Depression,

this

notorious gangster set up free soup
kitchens at which he fed numbers of the
unemployed. He was fond of calling
attention to these soup kitchens as proof of
the good he was doing his fellow man. Of
course I speak of no such mockeries.
Rather let us think of men like O. Henry,
who served a jail sentence for a crime.
Surely it helped him at last to find himself,
for it was afterward that he became known

for his wonderful stories with all their deep
understanding of human nature.
Close the door on your past and keep it
closed. I have heard it said that you never
really get over the death of a loved one.
This is so in the sense that every
circumstance of your life, every joy and
every sorrow, has an effect in shaping you
into what you are. But you have great
control over the way it shapes you – never
forget that!
I am not one of those who believe in doing
away with the natural emotion of sorrow
when death occurs. Tears and sorrow are
provided by nature as a safety valve for the
overflowing emotions. Yet most people
wait too long to close the door on mourning;
or they never close it. We say "There is no
use in worrying over something you can't

control." Yet we worry over death for
unconscionable periods of time, knowing
all the while we cannot control it.
The physical body comes from the air and
the soil and goes back to the sources from
which it came. Perhaps the mental and
spiritual portions and some mysterious
essence of life also go back to sources we
can sense but cannot discover. So be it!
Carry along with you not the pain you knew
when a loved one died, but rather the
positive and sustaining memories. As life is
a natural process, so death is also.
Do you think it is possible to have only one
great love in your life, especially if that love
was

sealed

in

marriage?

Human

experience proves this is not so. While I
believe firmly in marriage, I know that the
word "marriage" is not always synonymous

with the word "happiness." You have a right
to happiness, and this is your life. When a
marriage turns out to have been a mistake,
when it can be broken but it is not broken,
then the mistake is perpetuated and
shadows all the rest of life. Sometimes the
door of the past must be closed upon a
marriage before either party to that
marriage, or both, can find any kind of life
success.
A job that is past opens a new door to
the future. Suppose you have lost your job
through no fault of your own. Suppose,
then, you nurse a great resentment and a
festering hatred of your former employer
who was so unjust to you. Meanwhile you
are going around looking for another job –
and something is saying No to any
prospective future employer. What says

No? The negative qualities of hatred and
resentment which beam from your mind to
his. He cannot tell just what it is, but he
feels something disturbing about you and
he doesn't want you in his office or his
shop.
Put the temporary setback firmly behind
you, however – go out with a determined
will to get a better job than the one you lost
– and anyone who interviews you will feel
the positive qualities that mean good man.
What if you are questioned about your
former employer?
Say nothing bad about him! What was bad
must always stay in the past and never be
allowed to hinder the future.
Jobs also seem to be favorite spots in
which to grow grudges. Of course you have

rights and it is no part of success or peace
of mind to allow yourself to be stepped
upon. Many little scratches in human
relations, however, are nothing but that,
just little scratches, and need not be
reacted to as though they were deep
wounds.
How BIG are you? It takes a big person to
succeed. To begin with, it takes a big
person to see what is big, and worth one's
attention, rather than waste emotional
energy on trifling matters. When you see
how you damage yourself by bearing
resentment and grudges, you can put small
annoyances in the past as soon as they
occur. At times it is advisable to talk things
over, point out how another person wounds
others, and start afresh with the air cleared.
But a nursed grudge is a viper in the

bosom. It is a treasured negative and you
not only let it take away your peace of mind,
you also encourage the formation of ulcers
and many other ailments which the mind
can inflict upon the body. Close that door!
It is wonderful and gratifying to see how the
habit of closing the door upon the past
becomes one of the greatest of sustaining
habits. It helps you take possession of your
own mind and condition it for the attainment
of any purpose you desire.
Go the extra mile. I have often been asked
to give a man something to do that helps
him

leave

resentment

behind

him;

especially where his job and his career are
concerned. The best possible action is this
go the extra mile.

Give more service and better service than
you are paid for. Find out more about your
job and the job above it than you absolutely
have to know. Work in a way that makes
your job do more than it is expected to do
for the organization that employs you.
A young man was an estimator for a large
printing firm. He didn't pay much attention
to typefaces, being content to let the
customers go on using the typefaces to
which they were accustomed. This made
his job easier – but, as I pointed out to him,
it did nothing to qualify him as a man who
really knows his job.
He studied typefaces, arrangements of
type on a page and other matters which
lend effect and even artistry to broadsides
and brochures. When his boss received
compliments on "the beautiful jobs you tum

out," the boss realized what this young man
was doing for his firm's reputation. The
young man is now an executive of the firm,
where before he was scarcely noticed. The
young man also has relieved himself of a
feeling of bitterness which might, in the
end, have resulted in making him an old
man with a mean little salary and a mean
little soul.
A saleswoman at a dry goods counter had
decided that her salary and her small
commissions paid her for going through the
routine motions of selling what she found
on the shelves, and that was that. One day
a woman asked her so pleasantly and so
positively to look for an item in the depths
of the stockroom that she found herself
looking; and when she discovered the item,
she felt "bigger inside." Thereafter she

made a point of suggesting items which
were not visible and of putting through
special orders even when they resulted in
little benefit to herself.
Soon

she

had

a

regular

clientele.

Customers were willing to wait in order to
have her serve them. Moreover, her
knowledge of her business caused the
buyer to rely upon her judgment. She is a
buyer now, with a grand career opening
before her. She says ''There are two
factors that can make you successful; your
job and yourself. You are always the most
important factor."
Of course you don't have to feel mean and
small and imposed upon before you go the
extra mile!

A tonic in itself, the willingness to do more
than you absolutely must is the hallmark of
the big earner, the great leader, the happy
and hearty person who day by day builds
value into his life.
See yourself on the next step up the ladder,
and the next step above that one, and
many rewarding steps ahead, and the
image takes hold firmly in your mind and
gets you going. Should you meet a
situation in which your extra efforts are not
rewarded, your positive mind finds courage
and resourcefulness and you leave the job
that's wrong for you – push it back into your
past – and find another in which the image
becomes real. Where you start never
matters so much as where you are going –
and it is first within your own mind that you
conceive greatly and begin to go.

Again the Supreme Secret has been
mentioned in several ways. You may not
yet be able to put it into words, but it works
more and more strongly in your favor as
you read successive chapters of this book.
Checking on  
Every adversity has within it the seeds of
an equivalent or a greater benefit
As you meet the circumstances of life, they
may seem adverse and damaging. Later
you find that every so-called misfortune
sows the seed of greater fortune to come.
To help this mighty dynamic work its
wonders in your life, close the door on your
past. Carry along with you only what is
pleasant and instructive. Leaving gloom
and pain behind you, you can see the
future and make it yours.

Keep yourself aware of life's endless
combinations of circumstances
Do not believe that one experience of lost
love or lost opportunity or other misfortune
has ended your chances of winning what
you thought you had lost. Some of the
world's greatest men knew failure after
failure as they grew toward their ultimate
success. Even a handicap becomes a
benefit when the man himself decides the
way in which it will be a benefit to him.
When you speak of failure you attract
failure, when you speak of success you
attract success
The failure typically dwells upon his failure
and drags it through his life like a prisoner
dragging his chains. The failure also tends
to be envious of those who succeed, and

his envy and his malice rob him not only of
wealth but also of peace of mind. Every age
has its special advantages. An entire
business may be labeled failure and yet
come to life and make millions in the hands
of a man who sees success and speaks
only of success.
Is there a definite connection between
wealth and peace of mind?
There is a strong connection, but it is not
unbreakable.

Sufficient

money

is

necessary to almost everyone who wishes
to attain peace of mind, but wealth can
steal happiness away from those who
make it dishonestly or do not use it
correctly. Use your work and your wealth to
help others. Above all, make sure that as
you climb the ladder of success you do not
step upon anyone else. Cutting the corners

of dishonesty sets up a feeling of guilt
which can destroy happiness. Even so, one
who has erred can put his error firmly in the
past, close the door and go on to great
accomplishment.
Go the extra mile
In work situations especially, grudges and
a feeling of resentment play havoc with the
mind's ability to conceive and achieve.
Going the extra mile has a tonic effect in
relieving the mind of built-in obstacles. Add
to your work more than you are paid for.
Always qualify yourself for the next step
upward and the steps beyond. People who
succeed are not people who hold grudges
or who withhold their best work, but those
who in every act and thought pave their
way toward greater things.

  The Basic Mental Attitude
that Brings Wealth and Peace of Mind
A life of wealth enjoyed by a mind at peace
comes most often to men who maintain a
positive mental attitude. With definiteness
of purpose you add great positive power to
your own mental attitude, and you can use
definite motives to sustain the actions
which propel you toward your goal. At the
same time you can set up spiritual
guardians to keep your attitudes at a high
"Yes" level, avoid conflicts of motive, tunein on other positive minds.
THE computers which are beginning to
manage

our

world

are

complicated

devices. Most of them, however, have a
very simple basic principle they say Yes or
No. They either open a kind of electrical
gate or they keep it closed, and by

multiplying this process they can assimilate
and select all kinds of information.
The mind of man is far more wonderful than
any machine. Within it, however, there
seems to be a kind of Yes-No valve at the
focal point of thinking. It is as though your
awareness of a circumstance of life – sent
to your brain by your sight, hearing and
other senses – presents itself at the YesNo point to be processed. A person who
maintains a positive attitude will find every
possible Yes in that circumstance and
make it part of his life. A person who
maintains a negative mental attitude will
lean toward the No side, miss much that is
good, live with much that is painful and
damaging.
Nothing but a mental attitude? Nothing but
a mental attitude, but it is right there that

your success or your failure, your peace of
mind or your nervous tension, your
tendency toward good health or your
tendency toward illness begins.
Fortunately, it is possible for anyone to
make the change from negativism to
positivism, and thus basically condition his
brain to bring all that is good in life.
Moreover, there are certain "control levers"
which the Creator makes available to us,
and it is easy to see how successful people
use these levers, once you know what they
are.
I shall give you some here and some in
other chapters so as to reinforce your
memory. Now and then you will find
repetition of names, facts and methods in
this book, always with a view toward
helping you remember.

Control

your

mental

attitude

with

definiteness of purpose. Emerson said
'The world makes way for a man who
knows where he is going."
Think what it means to know where you are
going! Automatically you rid yourself of all
kinds of fears and doubts which may have
crept

into

the

making-up-your-mind

process. Your purpose is definite and –
presto! – all the limitless forces of your
mind focus upon that purpose and no other.
Knowing your purpose, you cannot be led
astray by circumstances or words which
have nothing to do with your purpose.
Where, before, a day's work may have
contained a good deal of wasted motion,
now your efforts are lined up so that each
mental or physical motion helps every other
motion.

You can see the connection with building
wealth, for work done well is a basic
wealth-builder.
Now see the connection with peace of
mind. A man who works wholeheartedly at
his job is not concerned with such matters
as finding fault with others, disturbing his
conscience by cutting comers in his work,
watching the clock and so forth. Nor will he
be discouraged by any obstacles which
may crop up; his positive and focused
mental attitude keeps him in a prime
position to handle problems and overcome
them.
Is this a secret of "genius"? I have
mentioned that many eminently successful
men

do

not

possess

any

greater

intelligence than most other men possess.
Yet their achievements are such that we

may say that these men have "genius."
Surely it is the positive mental attitude of
these men which makes their brain-power,
not greater, but more efficient and more
available than most others'. When I spoke
to such men as Henry Ford, Andrew
Carnegie and Thomas A. Edison, I spoke
with minds free of any fear or doubt that
they could do anything they wished to do.
I know that Andrew Carnegie was well
aware of the need for a positive mental
attitude. Before he undertook to back me in
my success, he really put me "on the spot"
as to my mental attitude.
Looking at me shrewdly across his desk,
that canny Scot said "We've talked a long
time and I have shown you the greatest
opportunity a young man ever had to
become famous, rich and useful. Now – if I

choose you out of the two hundred and
forty other applicants for this job – I'll
introduce

you

to

the

outstandingly

successful men in America – if I help you
get their collaboration in finding out the true
philosophy of success – will you devote
twenty years to the job, earning your own
living as you go along? We have had
sufficient discussion. I want your answer –
yes or no."
I began to think of all the obstacles that
would stand in my way. I began to think of
all the hurdles I would have to jump. I
began to think of all the time I would have
to spend, and the big job of writing, and the
problem of earning my living all that while –
and so forth.
I spent twenty-nine seconds struggling with
a negative mental attitude which, had it

overcome me, would have affected me
negatively ever after.
How do I know I took just twenty-nine
seconds? Because, when I found the
positive mental attitude which I had lost
temporarily and said "Yes!" Mr. Carnegie
showed me the stopwatch he had been
holding beneath his desk. He had given me
just one minute in which to show my
positive state of mind – otherwise, he felt,
he would not have been able to depend on
it. I had beaten the deadline by just thirtyone seconds, and thereby embraced an
opportunity that was destined to change
and improve the lives of millions of people,
including my own.
A positive mind tunes in on other
positive minds. Once I had accepted that
great task and had set my mind confidently

toward it, I found that my imagined
obstacles simply melted away. Of course
my positive mental attitude helped me not
only in finding out the success secrets of
some five hundred of America's wealthiest
men, but also in making considerably more
than a mere living. Am I a genius? I must
say I have positive evidence I am not!
In meeting many men I discovered a very
valuable fact a positive mind automatically
obtains benefit from other positive minds.
Are you aware of the general principle of
radio broadcasting? It is this when
electrical vibrations of rapid frequency are
impressed upon a wire, those vibrations
leap into space.
Another wire far away – the receiving
antenna – can pick them up, and thus a

message or a picture is transmitted over
thousands of miles, or millions of miles in
space-age communication.
There are electrical currents in the brain.
They give you a private broadcasting
station through which you may send out
any kind of thought vibrations you desire.
Keep that station busy sending out
thoughts of a positive nature, thoughts
which will benefit others, and you will find
you can receive kindred thought vibrations
from other minds whose attitude is tuned to
yours.
When I visited such successful men as
those I have mentioned, and many others
such as John Wanamaker, Frank A.
Vanderlip, Edward Bok and Woodrow
Wilson, both they and I felt the attunement
of mind to mind. Otherwise, I surely would

have met with opposition when I asked
those top-ranking men to give me of their
time and experience. Not only did such
men spend hours talking to me, but also,
they served as my teachers and guides for
year after year and charged me nothing.
Believe in what you are doing, and you too
will see the great effect of your belief upon
those whom you may request to help you.
Doubt yourself and the No part of your mind
takes over and draws defeat instead of
victory.
This barely sketches in the all-pervasive
power of a positive mental attitude. Let us
look at some of the other "control levers"
which combine with a positive mental
attitude to give you wealth and peace of
mind for an entire, victorious lifetime.

The nine major motives. It is not for
nothing that court trials often concern
themselves with questions of motive.
Everything you do is the result of one or
more motives. In various combinations we
use nine basic motives.
The seven positive motives are
. The emotion of LOVE
. The emotion of SEX
. The desire for MATERIAL GAIN
. The desire for SELF-PRESERVATION
. The desire for FREEDOM OF BODY
AND MIND
. The desire for SELF-EXPRESSION
. The desire for PERPETUATION OF
LIFE AFTER DEATH

The two negative emotions are
. The emotion of ANGER AND REVENGE
. The emotion of FEAR
In those nine motives you can find the roots
of everything you do or refrain from doing.
Peace of mind is attained only by the
exercise of the seven positive motives as a
general pattern of life. Rarely if ever does a
person who has peace of mind exercise the
two negative motives or emotions. You
cannot have peace of mind while you fear
anything or anyone. You cannot have
peace of mind while you entertain the kind
of anger which brings you to a desire for
revenge or a desire to injure another, no
matter what the justification may seem to
be.

Great men have no time to waste with a
desire to injure others. If they did, they
would not be great men. Great men are not
immune to fear, but theirs is not the kind of
fear that hangs on constantly and takes
over all of life. Look to small, mean men to
see lifelong patterns of fear and anger.
Their minds are so filled with these
negative influences that they cannot find
the power to shape the circumstances they
desire.
Recently I heard about a man, now
seventy, who fifteen years ago lost all his
money in a real estate venture. Taking the
advice of a friend, he had borrowed heavily
in order to invest in vacant swampland on
the assumption that in a couple of years the
land would be in great demand for building
lots. This did not transpire, the man's notes

became due, and he had to see his retail
shoe business sold out from under him.
The friend who had badly advised him also
had lost money. Nevertheless, this man
became filled with hatred toward his friend
and said he would get even "if it's the last
thing I do." It nearly was. Five years of
hatred left him incapable even of doing
business. Meanwhile the friend prospered
and seemed far out of reach of any puny
revenge. The man who had lost his money
at length lost the balance wheel of his mind
and had to spend six months in a quiet
place in the country surrounded by a high
wall.
In his last month of confinement, however,
he was sufficiently recovered to listen to an
adviser who pointed out to him that hatred
and the desire for revenge had done him

far more harm than had been done by his
losing his money. He was persuaded to
forgive the friend who had led him into the
real estate deal. He even wrote to this man,
telling of his change of heart.
When he went back into business it was
with love of his fellow men and the
determination to keep his mind filled with
positive, constructive motives. Beginning at
the age of sixty, he built a new career. Now,
at seventy, he is fairly well off, and most of
all he has peace of mind, the one form of
wealth which is indispensable.
I myself have suffered from the effects of
negative motives from time to time. When I
went into hiding, as discussed in the last
chapter, I acted at first upon a very wise
motive of selfpreservation. Soon, however,
this turned into fear and with the fear came

misery. Fortunately I saw in time what was
happening to me. It cannot happen again.
You can call upon Ten Princes of
Guidance to stand at the doors of your
mind. You can make yourself aware of
certain principles of personal guidance and
guardianship; and to make these principles
real and memorable, you can personalize
them – see them as so many Princes in
armor who stand at the doors of your mind.
These Princes challenge every thoughtvibration which seeks to enter. They keep
your mind positive, effective and free of
discord. I shall name my own Princes, a list
which you may wish to modify to suit your
own life-requirements.
The Prince of Peace of Mind. He stands at
the very outer door and asks all callers if

they come in peace to share my peace. If
not, they are turned away.
The Prince of Hope and Faith. He admits
only those influences which keep my mind
alerted with belief in my mission in life.
The Prince of Love and Romance. He
brings into my mind only those influences
which keep love eternally fresh in my heart.
The Prince of Sound Physical Health. He
knows the kind of mental influences which
can destroy health and admits only those
states of mind which help the body
maintain its vigor.
The Prince of Financial Security. When I
desire him to stand on guard, he admits no
thoughts save those which bring me worthy
financial benefit.

The Prince of Overall Wisdom. He is
charged with passing certain thoughts into
my store of knowledge when he sees they
will benefit me or help me benefit others.
The Prince of Patience. He keeps away all
impulses to rush, to tackle jobs halfprepared, to be in any way impatient with
the power of time.
The Prince of Normhill. "Normhill" is a very
personal word I have created for my own
use. Combining certain names, it means to
me what it cannot mean to any other. Just
so, create your own name for your own
very personal Prince. This Prince stands
guard along with all the others. The others
from time to time may be relieved of duty;
for

instance,

one

hardly

may

wish

continually to keep out all thoughts except
those which have to do with financial

security. Your special personal Prince is
always there, representing all the special
personal influences in your life. Normhill is
my ambassador-at-large who performs
services

not

assigned

to

the

other

members of my invisible family of guides.
When you have made yourself well aware
of your corps of spiritual Princes, they
serve to rally all your forces to solve any
problem or to set up special lines of
defense.
Sometimes I find myself talking to someone
whose antagonistic attitude begins to
invade my peace of mind. Very well – I
send a special alert to the Prince of Peace
of Mind. Immediately he takes charge of
the ramparts with doubled strength, and I
am calm and in control of my own mind
once more.

Or, let us say, I feel some physical ache or
pain. I call upon the Prince of Sound
Physical Health to look into the cause, and
I get good results. I believe I have received
benefits of healing which are beyond the
power of ordinary medical science to
explain.
My Princes of Guidance receive a certain
compensation for their services. Their
"pay" is my eternal gratitude. Daily I
express this gratitude, first to each of the
Princes individually, then to all of them in
their mighty group. You will find this
expression of gratitude of great help in
keeping your mind alerted to its own
powers. I know that if I ever neglect it, I feel
a neglect on the part of my Princes. When,
once again, I make myself aware every day
that I have great spiritual forces at my

command – there they are once more, as
strong as ever.
Don't let the motive of material gain
conflict with the motive of freedom.
Freedom of body is easy to see and
understand; but freedom of mind is a subtle
matter. Fear and anger put the mind behind
bars. Guilt wraps the mind in chains. To
add a bit of levity to a serious matter Once
there was a man who was encouraged to
know himself. Immediately he handcuffed
himself to his bed, so he would not get up
and rifle his own pockets during the night.
All too often the motive of material gain –
excellent in itself – conflicts with the
excellent motive of freedom of body and
mind because in gaining what is material,
we give up freedom of mind; we load the

mind with guilt and fear because we do not
act honestly.
In addition, one who makes his money
through taking dishonest advantage of his
fellow men has cheated himself of the
genuine joy which comes with honest
success. When you obey the rules of a
game, and win, you have done something
for your soul. When you cheat and win, you
only call it winning, but you have really lost
instead.
I believe I was fortunate in starting my
career very early in life, so that I learned
life's lessons quite early. Let me tell you of
an experience I had while I was holding my
first job. I was just out of business college
and I was inexperienced in the ways of life
and the character of men.

My employer owned a number of banks. He
had placed his son as a cashier of one of
his banks, in a distant town. One night a
hotel manager in that town telephoned me,
saying my employer's son was in serious
difficulty. He had not been able to reach my
employer. Immediately, I boarded the train
and arrived in the town early the next
morning.
When I went to the bank, I found the door
closed but unlocked. Inside, I discovered
that the vault had been left open and
beautiful green currency was scattered all
over the teller's counter.
I closed the door and picked up the
telephone. I managed to get my employer
on the phone and told him why I had gone
to that town and what I had found on my
arrival. In great distress, he said "Go

ahead and count the money. Balance the
books. Draw a draft on me for whatever
shortage there may be."
I settled down to counting the money. To
my great surprise, not a cent was missing.
I sat there looking at those piles of
greenbacks. My youth had been tragic,
turbulent and poor. My present state was
one of bare solvency. I sat there looking at
nearly $, in cash, knowing that I
could put at least half of it into my pocket
and nobody would be the wiser. My
employer's son showed obvious signs of
mental instability. Everyone would assume
he had taken the money. He even had
acted as though he had filled his own
pockets – and I was the only one who knew
he had not.

The motive of material gain nudged heavily
at me. But the motive of freedom said
Don't do it. Or rather, it was "something"
that kept me honest, for at that time I could
not have named the major motives.
Perhaps that "something" was the result of
certain sessions I had had with my
stepmother before I had left home, in which
she had instilled into me the fact that I was
in control of my own mind and that always
I must live with myself.
I locked the money into the vault forthwith,
then phoned my employer and told him
there was no deficiency to make up; not a
cent had been stolen. I walked out of that
bank with a mind at peace, a mind that was
free and joyously positive.
Forever after I have placed the motive of
freedom ahead of the motive of material

gain. I have succeeded in having all the
money I need without ever hampering
either my inward or outward freedom.
This episode was one of several which led
me straight to Andrew Carnegie and my
realization of my goal in life. My employer
was grateful for the way in which I had
protected his son's reputation as best I
could. He was responsible later for my
entering

Georgetown

University

Law

School. This led through a chain of
circumstances

to

my

assignment

to

interview Mr. Carnegie. If I had yielded to
the material gain motive that day in the
bank,

the

Science

of

Personal

Achievement might never have come into
being.
Yes, as Emerson suggested, there is a
silent partner in all our transactions, and

woe is the lot of the man who tries to drive
a sharp bargain with Life.
Life reflects your own thoughts back to
you. Thoughts are things, a poet said, and
truly they have an existence of their own,
so that a curse comes back to curse you
and a blessing comes back to bless you,
reflected by the mighty mirror of life.
Another poet said "I am the master of my
fate, I am the captain of my soul." This too
is true, and the two truths harmonize. Send
out positive thoughts from a positively
oriented soul and the world will reflect back
greater and greater positive influences to
help you.
Tum back and read the list of nine basic
motives. Concentrate on the seven positive
motives. Remember it is possible for these
motives to come into conflict, as we have

seen; but by and large they drive one way,
and with a positive mental attitude they
take you the way you want to go. We shall
not say farewell to the motives till we are
finished with this book; but let us now pay
our respects briefly.
Love has limitless scope. Handle it in a
spirit of reverence, for it is tuned to the
Eternal. Give freely of it and you will attract
as much as or more than you give; stop
giving love and you stop receiving. With no
other emotion or motive or desire is the
mirror of life so very evident.
Sex is the great creative force of the
universe. On its highest plane it merges
with love; but love can exist without being
sexual. The mighty power of sex can be
transmuted into action for the achievement
of profound purpose, and so important is

this matter that later on we shall devote an
entire chapter to it. On the other hand, sex
may be debauched and misused, and it is
in this guise that it brings grief and trouble
to mankind and gives itself an undeserved
bad reputation.
Self-preservation can become a negative
force when one seeks it without regard to
the rights of other people. It is instilled by
Nature to help us stay alive. Even so, the
human being assumes the prerogative of
rising above it. When a ship is sinking it is
women and children first, and there are
many parallel instances which call forth a
nobility in human nature.
Self-expression is part of finding oneself. It
is part of one's freedom to be oneself. Thus
it is positive, constructive and infinitely
valuable. Only make sure that your own

means of self-expression do not demean or
damage others.
Perpetuation of life after death belongs
among the earliest beliefs and motives of
mankind. It should be bounded by common
sense and a true understanding of one's
relationship to that change known as death.
When wrapped in superstition and fear, this
motive leads only to wretchedness. It can
tum life into a preparation for death and
hamper an entire civilization.
The surest way of finding peace of mind.
The surest way of finding peace of mind is
that which helps the greatest number of
others to find it.
Let this be your guide to your use of the
great motivating forces; then you will know

you are using them correctly, not corrupting
them.
Is there peace of mind in prayer? There can
be. There should be. But note how many
people go to prayer only in the hour of a
misfortune, when the motive of fear
dominates their minds. The approach must
be negative in that case, and so, in terms
of peace of mind, the results must be
negative as well.
Prayers which bring peace of mind proceed
from a mind which gives forth a confident
message even though that mind may be
afflicted with problems and sorrow. Prayers
which free great forces to solve problems
are born in minds which know that the
problems can be solved once the forces
are found and have perfect confidence in
the existence of those forces.

Along with many others I see evidence of
an Intelligence beyond man's. I believe that
the positively conditioned mind may at
times tune in on that Intelligence. Yet mindconditioning through prayer or resolution is
something an individual must accomplish
for himself. When the Creator made man
free to seek his own destiny, and choose
between good and evil, he gave man this
prerogative

as

well.

Every

great

accomplishment of any man at any time
first had to exist as a thought before it could
exist as reality.
Have you recognized the Supreme Secret?
Checking on  
Life says Yes when you maintain a positive
mental attitude

The mind of man is more wonderful than
any computer. Like a computer, however, it
seems to process much thinking at a Yes
or No gate. A positive mental attitude helps
you find every possible Yes in every lifecircumstance.

Even

if

your

attitude

presently is negative, you can change it to
positive and open your life to all that is rich
and rewarding
Control

your

mental

attitude

with

definiteness of purpose
Famous and successful men never show
any doubt as to their ability to do what they
wish to do. Anyone at any stage of his life
can win the benefits of this mindtransforming method. Focus your mind
upon a single purpose and you seem to
achieve "genius" powers because your
mind works far more efficiently. Now you

find ways to handle problems that used to
stump you, and to set obstacles aside. A
positive mind tunes in on other positive
minds. Through this mental broadcasting
you exchange priceless information and
guidance.
Control the major motives that control your
life
Seven positive motives and two negative
motives stand behind everything you do.
Small

men

allow

the

two

negative

emotions, anger and fear, to rob them of
peace of mind and prevent their minds from
conceiving and achieving greatly. Big men
use the seven positive motives to build the
kind of lives they want. You can form
Princes of Guidance to stand at the doors
of

your

mind

and

prevent

negative

influences from entering. When you make

use of such spiritual Princes, they are
always

ready

to

take

care

of

any

emergency situation, such as a threat to
health, as well as your day-to-day needs.
You can prevent your motives from
conflicting with each other
The desire for material gain may conflict
with the desire for freedom – but freedom
of mind and body is the more important.
The emotion of love is yours as long as you
give love to others. Sex is a creative force
which should not

be debauched or

misused. The belief in a life after death
must be freed from superstition and fear.
Self-expression and self-preservation are
great human rights which benefit you when
they do not harm others. All the positive
motives will guide you, and the negative
motives, if they touch you, will not harm you

if you remember The surest way of finding
peace of mind is the way which helps the
greatest number of others to find it.

  When You Are Free of Fear,
You Are Free to Live
Free yourself of fear, and you free yourself
of a man-made devil. Seven major fears
reinforce each other the fear of poverty,
the fear of criticism, the fear of ill health, the
fear of loss of love, the fear of loss of liberty,
the fear of old age, the fear of death.
Separate your self-made fears from the
fears

which

are necessary

for self-

preservation. Make way for self-confident
faith

in

yourself,

the

indispensable

ingredient of a life worth living.
WHEN you fear something, that thing is
more likely to find you and harm you. When
you look a threat in the eye and know you
are going to overcome it – that is when
great powers come to your aid.

Fear, the most powerful of negative
motives, is like prayer in reverse. Instead of
appealing to the constructive forces which
surround us, it appeals to the forces of
destruction. It becomes a god in itself,
demanding

endless

painful

sacrifices.

People rarely will admit that lives of bitter
privation may be founded on nothing more
than constant fear – and yet you can see it
happen all around you.
The first fear I shall mention is a terribly
"magnetic" fear. The more of it you have,
the more you are likely to attract.
. The fear of poverty. Now and again I
have had occasion to meet people I knew
in my own poverty-stricken youth. Of late I
have

been

meeting

their

now-grown

children. When I have known both parent
and child, I often can trace the persistence

of a kind of family fondness for poverty.
Fearing poverty with good reason as it
ground them down – hating it and
protesting

it

nevertheless

–

such

allowed

families
their

have

negative

emotions to dull their wits and cancel their
courage.
In the greatest nation in the world, a nation
that fairly throbs with opportunity, they
settle down to live in want. Some member
of the family may make some gesture
toward lifting himself out of his rut, but it
always turns out to be a feeble gesture that
lacks follow through. Perhaps it salves his
conscience to have this gesture to point to
for the rest of his life. Worse yet, whole
families are brought up in the belief that
God intended them to be poor! Surely it
must be the final twist of fear which equates

the idea of God with the idea of
persecution.
To be poor and not to like being poor is a
good step toward becoming rich. But put
aside your fear of poverty. See it rather as
merely that point from which you take off.
Let

your intimate

knowledge

of

the

unwanted condition become a sustaining
force as you drive toward the condition you
do want – prosperity, even opulence.
Let your present necessity for pinching
pennies make you aware of the power of
money. Let your lack of capital make you
aware of the many ways you can make use
of other people's money merely by paying
them a fair fee for their money's hire.
Know that much education is free, that selfeducation in some fields can be better than

school education, that vast stores of
information may be used free, that industry
and trade stand with open arms to receive
the willing worker. Know that our economy
is so vast and various that any special
talent can find the place where it is needed;
and our economy is filled with unmet needs
which you can meet.
I forbear from giving you a list of the many
well-known men who began their lives in
poverty.
We have met many of them and shall meet
others. Cast out fear of poverty and drive
ahead.
. The fear of criticism. Your mind has
limitless power to make a dream come true
– provided you allow your mind to work
unhampered. Few fears hamper a mind so

quickly as the fear of criticism. It can stop
you before you get started. And yet it is
nothing but the influence of another mind or
other minds – a negative influence which
often is only imagined. A person who is
filled with fear of criticism often will not put
forth his ideas lest he be rebuffed, and so
he loses his great gifts of imagination and
self-reliance. We may examine the careers
of

men

who

achieved

mighty

breakthroughs in their fields and we may
marvel at the way in which they found their
abilities and put them to effective use. At
the same time we may see many of the
obstacles they had to overcome. Rarely,
however do we know of the adverse
criticism many such men faced. Had they
feared this criticism and let it take root in
their minds, all their ability to conceive and

achieve might have been crippled. Indeed,
they never might have felt it, for their minds
would not have been free minds that drive
ahead.
The automobile, of course, "would not
work." Nor would the airplane. Nor would
space travel. By the time Henry Ford was
ready to manufacture automobiles on a
mass production basis the automobile
obviously worked, but mass production of
such tricky devices was sneered at. They
were a laboratory curiosity. Nobody could
supply the gasoline necessary, nor the
rubber, nor insure that such necessities
would be available to a motorist wherever
he might travel. Furthermore, said the
bankers with whom Henry Ford preferred
not to do business, people simply would not
buy such a high-priced gadget in sufficient

quantities. Almost everyone who knew of
Ford's plans condemned them on one
ground or another. Surely the sustaining
power of love helped Ford to know his own
mind, for Mrs. Ford said simply "Go ahead
no matter who criticizes."
More recently, a man named Henry Land
took a photograph of his young daughter.
She wanted to see the picture right away.
He

explained

that

first

the

roll

of

photographic paper must be taken out of
the camera and developed in a darkroom
by means of certain chemicals. Once the
negatives were obtained, they had to be
printed by intense light upon another kind
of paper which in its tum needed chemical
treatment; and so, at length, pictures would
appear.

At this point his unhampered mind took
hold. Why not build a camera which
produced finished pictures? Anyone who
knew anything about photography could
have given him a dozen reasons why not –
but criticism did not stray the development
of the Land-Polaroid camera which does
exactly what young Miss Land requested.
Criticism cripples as well in the realm of
pure ideas. When I set out to organize the
Science of Personal Achievement, I was
almost snowed under by the criticism
heaped upon my head.
Most of the criticism came from my nearest
relatives, and this is hard to take. I could
not then have put in words the power that
kept me going – but I had my mind upon
my goal, not upon obstacles, and I kept
going. This first practical Science of

Personal Achievement has earned more
money for its users than was contained in
Andrew Carnegie's entire fortune – and he
was very likely the world's richest man.
It is one thing to listen to advice from a
person qualified to give advice. It is quite
another to allow adverse criticism to blunt
the fine edge of your own conquering mind.
Notice how much of such criticism comes
from people who criticize everything – in
particular,

from

people

who

criticize

everybody who tries to succeed. Failure,
like other forms of misery, loves company.
Cast out fear of criticism and drive ahead.
. The fear of ill health. Probably you
know more than one person whose main
topic of conversation is health – or rather,
ill health. Such people would rather
describe their operations than talk of the

benefit they derived – if indeed they
needed the operations in the first place.
They start each day by searching for
symptoms, first from the hair down and
then from the toes up and will find many a
"sure sign" of illness with which to bore
their friends. They buy every quack remedy
that comes along, follow every health fad
one year which turns out to be an antihealth fad the next year. They are
hypochondriacs; they imagine illness, fear
illness, and literally bring illness upon
themselves – for such is the negative
power of the mind.
In my sixty-odd years of adulthood I have
been gratified to see that physicians give
increasing

attention

to

psychosomatic

illness, or bodily illness which originates in
the mind. Since man's earliest history,

however, it has been obvious that almost
all of our illness is caused by unpeace of
mind. Here is a very partial list of symptoms
which can arise from mental conflicts,
fears, and tensions
•

Headache

•

Circulatory trouble

•

Indigestion

•

Frigidity

•

Ulcers

•

Impotence

•

Arthritic pains

•

Rashes, other skin afflictions

•

Constant fatigue

•

Mouth infection

•

Sleeplessness

•

Rectal disorders

•

Slow healing of wounds

•

Muscular cramps

•

Kidney trouble

•

... and more ... and more ...

Then there are the many mental disorders,
ranging from extreme nervous tension to
outright insanity, which often are caused or
aggravated by a mind which fights itself.
The list of ills to which body and mind may
yield is almost endless, so let your first step
toward good health be this do not dwell
upon the image of illness. The mind tends
to transmute all beliefs into their physical
equivalent. Why, then, see yourself as
anything but a person who enjoys good
sound health from top to toe and back
again?
Even if you do contract some illness or
injury, hold to the peaceful knowledge that

it is merely an adverse incident of life which
of course you will overcome. Moreover, a
mind filled with faith and confidence can
better see beyond a disability to the healed
condition, the Yes condition – and this
above all is a healing aid which cannot be
supplied by medicine. It is conceived, and
therefore it is boundlessly powerful.
FAITH is the greatest of all healers. FAITH
is the great universal medicine which
prevents illness, cures illness, builds a
resistance to further illness, heals and
sustains. Have FAITH in your health, and it
is as though ill health starves to death for
lack of food. Keep ill health out of your
conversation. Keep ill health out of your
mind. Reflect your faith in the image of a
Prince of Sound Physical Health and that
Prince stands by, almost invincible. Then,

to prove conclusively that you have
stopped believing in ill health, empty your
medicine chest down the drain. Cast out
fear of ill health and drive ahead.
. Fear of the loss of love. Love walks
hand in hand with peace of mind. A couple
who truly love one another often reflect that
love upon the world like a beacon of
happiness. They "belong to each other," we
say, and in many ways they do. Yet look
beyond the trite statement and you will see
that belonging is not the same as selfishly
possessing. One who really loves another
does not hold his mate in chains of
jealousy, for this is fear, fear of the loss of
love. True love knows no fear. Moreover,
love cannot be demanded; it must be given.
Should it cease to be given it no longer
exists.

The end of love is not pleasant. No adverse
circumstance is pleasant when it occurs.
Yet to fear it in advance, as so many do, is
as damaging as to imagine oneself dead in
advance of dying.
A particular person's love may be lost but
love itself never is lost. The capacity for
love beats with the heart. It seeks another,
and love for one person always can be
transmuted into love for another.
Know that there is another. Know too that
love also transmutes itself into great
achievement and great Service. Charles
Dickens' first love almost ended in tragedy
when he found it was not reciprocated. He
transmuted his love into his writing, and his
most popular book, David Copperfield,
arose from a heart which seemed to be
broken.

Love generously. Love fully. Love faithfully.
Love is a great power for good when you
get it, but love can destroy you when it gets
you. Do you think I am cynical in talking
thus of the most sublime of all emotions?
No, I am following the purpose of this book
and showing you the lessons of life itself.
Any fear holds you back and hurts you.
Cast out fear of loss of love and drive
ahead.
. Fear of the loss of liberty. I read
recently about a man who had served a
term in prison and had been released. He
had difficulty in finding a job, for he was
honest enough to say he was an exconvict. He was for a time unable to come
home to his family, for they mistrusted him.
Within himself, however, he knew he was a
changed man, and with quiet persistence

he has won back a place in the world of
honest

people.

thankfulness

at

He

expressed

his

having

regained

the

privileges of working for a living, of planning
a career, of having a family and a home.
"But

all

these

blessings

have

their

foundation in a greater blessing," he said.
"I have my liberty."
Millions have learned what happens when
an entire nation loses its liberty. The
necessities of life may all be present, and
many of the luxuries, but without the liberty
to speak one's mind and live one's own life,
all the rest seems a mockery. I recall a
group of men and women who crossed the
ocean in a tiny, unseaworthy boat and
nearly drowned several times in order to
win their way to our land of liberty. This
sailing craft began its voyage with two

masts, and at one port of call they sold one
mast in order to buy provisions – yet still
they struggled onward to find liberty.
And I know of many who have given up so
much liberty of body and mind that they
might as well be in prison or living under a
dictator. Also, I know many others who so
constantly fear the loss of liberty that the
fear itself becomes a fetter on their souls –
as is the case with fear of any kind.
When I speak of freedom of mind and body
I speak of a basic, personal freedom. It is
not a physically absolute freedom. If each
of us were absolutely free to do whatever
he wanted to do, we would have chaos
instead of civilization. Peace of mind
includes going along with the laws and
customs of our times and our society. It

also includes a balanced view toward any
temporary loss of freedom.
A little while ago I suffered a temporary loss
of liberty to get about as I wish. A light case
of influenza sneaked past my Prince of
Sound Physical Health and sent me to bed
for three days. I could have fretted about
the appointments I had to cancel; but if I
had, my mind would have lost its liberty.
Instead, I devoted the time to peacefully
and restfully outlining this book. It had been
a task which I had been "getting around to"
for a long time. Once again, I proved the
soundness of the principle that every
adversity carries within it the seed of an
equivalent or greater benefit.
The concept of time is closely allied to the
concept of freedom. Time is wealth, and
unlike money when it is gone you cannot

replace it. Many a man who arrives
promptly for an appointment only to be kept
waiting – or who is stuck in a traffic jam –
gets into a stew over this infringement of
his right to spend his time as he wishes to
spend it. I have pointed out to salesmen
that time spent in an anteroom can be time
spent in reviewing one's sales pointers and
thus be the better prepared for selling – or,
in many cases, the time may be spent in
observing and listening so that one gathers
useful information about the customer's
needs. For a salesman or anyone else,
enforced waiting time can be transmuted
into a time of quiet relaxation which
restores the strength of mind and body.
Even a driver in a traffic jam can keep his
mind peaceful and thoughtful, and it is often
on such occasions, while one is alert but

not

heavily

subconscious

concentrating,

that

the

mind

back

the

feeds

answers to questions and problems which
may have lain within it a long time.
Peace of mind is a many-splendored thing.
Now connect it with the statement you read
a moment ago Time is wealth, and unlike
money when it is gone you cannot replace
it. Peace of mind is so beneficial to your
entire well-being, however, that it is almost
certain to extend your life and to help you
keep active and productive far into your
later years – so that "lost" time can in a
sense be replaced, and at a most valuable
period.
Liberty includes peace of mind; peace of
mind is a basic liberty. We have too many
slaves to the clock, too many slaves to the
bankbook, too many slaves to convention

and to self-consciousness. Before you say
I am free, see if you answer yes to these
questions
When circumstances require me to use my
time in a way I did not plan to use it, do I, in
that time, know my own mind and use it
beneficially?
Have I set up my work schedule so that I
need not live in fear of work overwhelming
me and stealing my hours of rest?
When I find a way to express myself, and
know it is socially acceptable, do I continue
to express myself in that manner even
though others may think it strange?
Have I freed myself of any family or
regional or cultural custom which has
hampered my career or my personal life?

Am I willing to question the ways in which
other people do things, and never make an
absolute guide out of "That's the way it is
done"?
Do I realize I am not working for money, but
for that which money can buy?
If you honestly answer Yes to all these
questions, you are essentially a free person
and you do not fear the loss of freedom;
you know that freedom cannot be taken
away from the soul.
Notice the last question especially. When I
became aware of the drives which enable
men to make great fortunes, I also became
aware that some rich men do not have
peace of mind. An appreciation of money is
a far cry from the worship of money, which
in the end destroys happiness. Remember,

this book shows you how to grow rich and
have peace of mind.
Liberty extends in many directions. Those
who fear slavery are the ones who have
made themselves slaves, for they have
conditioned themselves to it and they know
how defenseless they have become. Cast
out fear of loss of liberty and drive ahead.
. Fear of old age. I used to be a good
amateur shortstop," mourns a man of
seventy-five, "and now I couldn't stop a
grounder that was rolling more than one
mile an hour." Such remarks are typical of
those who fear old age and so cannot know
peace of mind in the years which should be
most rewarding. Old age is a handicap,
yes, but only in connection with certain
types of physical motion. Nature never
takes away anything without replacing it

with something of equal potential value.
When Nature takes away youth, she
replaces it with wisdom. It is impossible for
a

young

person

to

possess

the

accumulated wisdom and experience of a
person of ripe age. Think that over before
you say old age is a drawback!
It is pathetic to see people assume extra
handicaps because they are past forty or
past fifty or even past seventy, when these
handicaps exist only in their own minds.
They show an inferiority complex, allow
younger people's thinking to overwhelm
their own mature and experience-backed
thinking.
They apologize for being old, as though
living past youth were a disgrace. They do
not expect to feel the impulses of initiative,
imagination and self-reliance – and so, of

course, they don't feel these so-called
"youthful" qualities. They act as though
losing youth's springy muscles must mean
you lose the power inside your head. This
is so only if you wish it – only if you fear old
age.
Recently I set up an entirely new series of
schools in several cities, where men of all
ages can learn the art of positive thinking
and how to use it to achieve success. Is it
"odd" that a man of my age should embark
upon such an enterprise? Only to a fearful,
hampered mind is it odd.
While I remain in direction, I can hire
younger, more active men to do the "leg
work." In fact, I can do a better job of such
direction than I could have done forty years
ago. I have that much more experience.
Also I have peace of mind in depth, as I did

not have it forty years ago, when I did not
yet completely see the forces which make
men what they are.
Part of the fear of old age, with many
people, stems from the feeling that an old
person inevitably must miss a great deal.
You cannot partake in so much that is
going on. Because of this, some people of
ripe years attempt to masquerade as
youths

and

only

succeed

in

being

ridiculous.
It is not necessary to partake physically of
the entire world around you so long as you
keep in touch with that world. Every few
years we see an advance in the means of
communication, so that the affairs of all the
world can be brought into the living room.
Surely the neighbors of my youth would
have been less ignorant and superstitious

if they had had today's opportunities to
know what is going on.
To keep yourself in tune with youthful
states of mind, however, I invite you to
make use of a procedure I have found very
useful. Every year I subtract one year at the
time of my birthday. Then I pay particular
attention to the aspects of the world which
appeal to a person of that age. I am now
back in my late twenties, renewing my
acquaintance with my state of mind in that
era, and also with much that is unique with
the

present

late-twenties

generation.

Viewing as I do from the vantage point of
experience, I have doubled fun; and at the
same time I gain a perspective on myself
as a younger person might see me. The
experience is both valuable and delightful.

Look deeply into your own vast experience
– refresh your deep knowledge of human
nature – find and feel the positive forces
which never are out of reach. Old age can
be the greatest time of your life. Cast out
fear of old age and drive ahead.
. Fear of death. My father tried to fill me
with the fear of fire and brimstone which
would be my lot after death. In fact, he tried
to beat the fear into me. Fortunately it never
took hold, even though such a dismal belief
was fostered by our local church.
If you have to rise above your religion in
order to rid yourself of the fear of death,
then rise above. Nobody has the right to tell
you that his way is the way to enjoy yourself
after you die. You need only to look down
the street where another group of people is
being assured that another way is the only

way. Again, you may believe, as I do, that
nothing you do in your lifetime has any
effect

upon

what

the

life-spirit

may

experience or where it may go after death
– and it is still a belief, no more.
It is, however, a belief which helps you
considerably in living a good, useful,
hearty, happy life right now, and enjoying
every bit of it. As for your being honest and
helpful with your fellow men, so that they
too may enjoy living – this is part of your
peace of mind, part of your success in
living.
During my entire life I never have sought
anyone's opinion about anything, unless I
had reason to believe that another person
knew more about a subject than I did. I
have found many opinions about what
happens after death, but I never have

found anyone who knew anything about
the subject. Shall I fear death, then, merely
because it is unknown?
No, I shall remind myself that there are two
types of circumstances. Type One is the
kind of circumstance which one may
control, modify or avoid; this type is worthy
of one's attention. Type Two consists of
circumstances which one cannot control, of
which death is the prime example. I shall
therefore do what I can to remain in good
health and good spirits, avoid obvious
threats to life and in other ways make
logical

use

of

the

motive

of

self-

preservation. But as for giving a second
thought to death itself – why worry about
the uncontrollable?
You wish to provide that your money or
property goes to your loved ones after you

die? Very well, this is controllable. We do
not delude ourselves into thinking we will
not

die.

philosophy

Yet

having

which

mastered

accepts

death

the
as

inevitable and which makes no false
attempt to see what lies beyond the veil we
cannot penetrate, you will fear nothing.
Your mind will tum from death to life – from
No to Yes – from guesses to realities. Cast
out the fear of death and drive ahead.
Man was made to live in full possession
of himself. Whoever created man gave
this wonderful new creature a possession
not shared by any other creature – the
possession of his own mind. Along with
this, the unknown Creator provided that
man be capable of fear because justified
fear is a part of self-preservation. One who
meets a tiger on a jungle trail, and has no

weapon in his hand, is well advised to be
fearful and to take immediate measures
toward his self-preservation.
Likewise, do we exercise caution in any
circumstance of inherent danger. The
motorist, one hopes, drives with attention to
the rules of safety. The child is taught to
look both ways before he crosses the
street. Self-made fears, however, are
another story. Apparently, man's mind
must also be capable of entertaining selfmade fear, or else it could not have its great
breadth of creativeness. Yet both through
the study of psychology and through
common-sense observation we see that
self-made

fears

are

unhealthful

and

damaging.
Being in full possession of your own mind,
you can free yourself of this kind of fear.

When you relate yourself properly to life
you have no need for such fears and no
occasion in which to suffer them. I repeat
If you have to rise above your religion in
order to rid yourself of fear, go ahead and
rise above it. Along with this ... if you have
to become bigger than your local folkways
to rid yourself of fear, go ahead and rise
above them. If you have to rid yourself of
certain people's company in order to rise
above your fears, go ahead and rid yourself
of such company, knowing the world is full
of people who are better employers or
better customers or better friends for you.
You would take drastic steps to get rid of
any poison that found its way into your
food. So let it be with fear, the mind poison.
Fear is the tool of a man-made devil. Selfconfident faith in oneself is both the man-

made weapon which defeats this devil and
the

man-made

tool

which

builds

a

triumphant life. And it is more than that. It is
a link to the irresistible forces of the
universe which stand behind a man who
does not believe in failure and defeat as
being anything but temporary experiences.
Again the Supreme Secret has beckoned
to you. When at last I give it to you beyond
question, you will not be surprised.
Checking on  
Fear is like prayer in reverse
With positive prayer we appeal to positive
and helpful forces beyond ourselves; with
fear we appeal to negative, destructive
forces. Anything you fear is much more
likely to harm you than it would be if you did
not fear it. This is notably true of the fear of

poverty,

which

cancels

the

courage

necessary to leave poverty behind you no
matter how many generations of your
family may have been poor.
Your mind has limitless power to make a
desire come true
To make a beneficial desire come true,
your mind must work unhampered. Fear of
criticism

can

cripple

even

a

highly

intelligent mind. Many successful men had
to overcome obstacles of which we know,
but also had to overcome criticism. Of the
damaging wishes which, alas, come true,
the most prevalent is a wish we generally
would deny having – the wish for ill health
which is founded on the fear of ill health. A
long list of ailments arise from a fearful
mind which fights itself. Faith is the greatest
health-sustainer and the greatest healer.

Only fear can rob you of love and liberty
True love is not possessive love. The
capacity for love remains even when love
is denied, and fear should not hamper the
expression of your love as transferred to
another person – for love cannot be
demanded, it must be given. Liberty, too,
lives within the heart despite outward
circumstances. Loss of liberty as well may
be incurred within the heart even when
outward circumstances indicate one is
"free." Freedom is a many-splendored
thing, and you should search your life to
find where you may have lost it and
substituted the slavery of fear instead.
The years past youth can be the best years
of your life

Nature always provides a compensation for
anything she takes away. Giving up the
intense physical drive of youth, we acquire
wisdom and experience which only age can
bring. Modern devices help us keep in
touch with the world. Reducing one year
from your age on each birthday gives you
perspective both on youth and age. The
fact of death need not be denied, but
nobody knows what lies beyond death's
impenetrable curtain so there is nothing to
fear from a circumstance we cannot
control. No matter how old you are, you can
keep yourself so busy living that the fear of
death finds no place in your mind.

  Will You Master Money or
Will It Master You?
Anything that robs you of peace of mind
robs you of life's greatest wealth. You may
lose peace of mind by pursuing money too
anxiously, or by trying to acquire more
money than you can spend wisely. Money
you earn through constructive work is the
money most likely to benefit you. It is a
mistake to deprive young people of the
need to know life through work. Anyone
can save, and the effort you make toward
saving a percentage of your income gives
you a true knowledge of the value of
money. Saving also prepares you to handle
many opportunities which otherwise might
slip by.
IN my explorations of the points of view of
young people I rarely find a great

appreciation of money, most especially
when a good sum of money is yet to be
earned. This is proper enough. A lack of
money makes the business of living so
difficult it is very likely to destroy peace of
mind.
So the young man pursues money. For a
good part of his life he is likely to have no
difficulty whatsoever in spending as much
as he makes. If he has a family, they help
him spend it. A successful man, however,
is not very old before he begins to
accumulate some money beyond his
immediate needs and his household bank
account. This money is likely to go into
investments, real estate and the like.
Be he a truly positive-minded man, he will
soon own considerable amounts of both
property and money. And somewhere

along the line he will have passed an
invisible border. He is now rich in the sense
that he has a considerable surplus above
his needs. Undoubtedly, he can fulfill any
reasonable want. And so, while his
financial records show he is rich, his inward
and very private record should show he has
peace of mind.
He will have peace of mind – if he has
mastered money. He will not – if money has
mastered him.
A man who makes a big splash may be
a man who has gone overboard. The "big
splash" is the big show of one's material
wealth. I have freely admitted my own
weakness for making a big splash in the
days of my Catskill estate – which I was
fortunate

enough

to

lose

before

it

permanently harmed me. Not every man is

endangered by making a vast show of his
wealth, and some seem to thrive on it.
Others enter upon such conspicuous
display that obviously they have gone
overboard – their souls are drowning in
their sea of dollars.
Some years ago a man who had earned
several million dollars suddenly went
bankrupt. When the lawyers searched his
assets, they found a large warehouse filled
with valuable antique furniture, magnificent
paintings and the like. They all belonged to
the man who was bankrupt, and he had
paid for them in cash. But had he ever
enjoyed them? Most of those precious
items never had been unpacked! He liked
to talk about his treasures, however, and
make himself sound like a veritable
Croesus. Such an accumulation mania is at

the opposite pole from a mind that knows
peace.
"They are going to take it away from
me!" The fear of poverty has a strange and
ugly first cousin. It is the rich man's fear that
his money will be taken away from him; or
that he will not be allowed to pile up his
money into ten times the sum he possibly
could use – twenty times – thirty times!
I once knew a majority stockholder of the
fabulous Coca-Cola Company. He had
gathered money in many ways and was
worth about twenty-five million dollars. Did
he have peace of mind? He had a mind
filled with hatred and mistrust. His worst
hatred

was

directed

toward

the

government. Although he was then well in
his eighties, he always prophesied that the

government would cause him to die a
pauper.
The last time I ever saw him, he asked me
a most significant question "If you were in
my place, what would you do to protect
your peace of mind and save your money?"
I had determined that for the sake of my
own peace of mind I never would start a
quarrel with this man; but, if he ever asked
me a direct question, he would receive a
direct answer. Even so, I asked him now if
he wanted my honest opinion. "Yes!" he
said. "Naturally!"
"Well," said I, "if I were in your place and
wanted peace of mind, I would not save my
money. Your peace of mind and your
money have become enemies who cannot
live side by side. If I were you, I would first

convert all my money into United States
Savings Bonds so that it would go to work
for the benefit of all the people. Then I
would pile all those bonds into my fireplace
and set fire to them. And as I watched my
money go up the chimney, I would watch a
great deal of my unhappiness bum away."
My friend snapped, "Don't be facetious!"
"I was never more serious in my life," I
replied. "If I had your fortune and it deprived
me of my peace of mind, I would first put
my money where it would be well
distributed and then I would burn every
symbol of my government's debt to me.
Then I would go to bed and sleep like a
child and wake up feeling peaceful and
free."

I did not expect this man to follow my
advice. To the day he died he lived in fear
and bitterness, and I believe that the illness
and debility which dogged him long before
he died was rooted in his love – not of
mankind, but of money.
There are very few people for whom advice
to burn their money would be good advice.
The principle is what holds for every one of
us. Nothing, absolutely nothing is as
precious as your peace of mind. Few young
people see this. Some people see it as they
gain more experience. Many never see it.
Remember, you can be rich with peace of
mind, but if money or anything else gets in
the way of your peace of mind, choose
peace of mind and let the other go.
Notice I made no attempt to evaluate my
friend's complaint against the government.

His complaint may in some ways have
been justified. It was his attitude I drove at
– an attitude of fear and distrust while he
was at least twenty-five times a millionaire
and could have done so much toward
making himself and others happy.
How much money does a man need?
Andrew Carnegie certainly had a firm hold
on methods for making money. In his later
years, his earnest wish was to give this
"know-how" to the average man. Mr.
Carnegie was one of the first of the
enlightened industrialists who saw how
important it is for a nation to spread its
wealth.
He saw that millions can be rich in the
sense of having plenty. He also saw that, in
the nature of things, the man who has
millions always will be an exception. He

saw that a goal of "millions" of even "a
million" is not the right goal for the majority
of men. For many, such a goal sets up
strains which deny peace of mind. They
may give up too much that is necessary for
men of their personality, and so end with
nothing. He admonished me again and
again to make this clear, and I have done
my best to do so.
How much money, then, does a man need?
As much as will keep him and his loved
ones in what he considers solid comfort,
along with enough luxury so that he may
feel he has tasted the treats of life.
Aiming for this, and always maintaining his
peace of mind, he conditions himself to a
full use of his self-confident faith. And lo!
out of this conditioning he often finds a

moneymaking power beyond his dreams.
For such a man, excess money never will
be a curse. He knows how to live, so he
knows how to broaden his life. He has
never tried to cheat others, so he knows
how to help others.
The man who wanted a hundred billion
dollars. A student of mine once flew all the
way from India to have an interview with
me. First, he sent me a letter in which he
stated that his major purpose in life was to
accumulate one hundred times as much
wealth as Henry Ford had accumulated, or
about one hundred billion dollars. He
wished to be one hundred thousand times
a millionaire.
When at length we sat in my study, I asked
him what he would do with that modest little
sum of money.

After

some

hesitation,

he

admitted

"Honestly, I don't know."
"Well," I said, "the possession of one
hundred billion dollars by one individual
poses a threat to the world. But let us put
that aside. If you desired to spend the sum
in helping the people of India overcome the
superstitions and outmoded customs which
have held them in bondage for centuries,
I'd have some sympathy with you. It seems
to me that you just want the money for the
sake of outdoing Henry Ford."
He thought awhile and admitted this was
so. I helped him search himself, and he
saw that in using the Science of Personal
Achievement he had "taken the bit in his
teeth" and was galloping beyond control.
What the mind builds in imagination, the
mind can indeed build in reality; but we

speak of a mind in good balance.
Discussing his affairs, he came to see that
a quarter of a million dollars would buy him
what he really wanted. With that realization,
the tense businessman – he was an
importer – relaxed and said he felt much
better.
This story's sequel involves another of
those "coincidences" I do not believe are
really coincidences. Before this man
returned to India, I helped him secure
several contracts for the sale of Americanmade products in his homeland. His profit
eventually amounted to just a little over a
quarter of a million dollars.
Money that benefits you most often
comes from work that benefits you. In
the last chapter I planted the idea that one
can insure that his money and property go

to persons of his choice when he dies.
Unlike death itself, the bequeathing of
assets is a controllable circumstance.
You are going to make money; and when
you do, please be careful that such a
bequest does not rob an inheritor of his
peace of mind.
It has been said, and with reason, that a
rich man's son often does not display the
ability his father had. I believe that many
rich men's sons are robbed of this ability
because they inherit their fathers' money.
By and large, the "old man" worked for his
money. His money came to him side by
side with the development of his insight, his
ability, his knowledge of people and his
knowledge of the world. He was not given
riches by his father; he was given riches by
his work.

Now let us look at the son. All his life he has
lived in the midst of money and the many
comforts which money buys. He knows he
is going to inherit great amounts of money.
Assuming that he does have the inherent
willingness to work hard – what happens to
that willingness? In many cases it is
replaced by a willingness to get something
for nothing, and thus he never learns one
of the basic lessons of life.
Great fortunes or modest fortunes are a
blessing only when they are used in good
part to benefit others. No father benefits his
son when he robs him of initiative. No
testator favors a beneficiary by making it
unnecessary for him to work. You may wish
to shield your inheritors from the meanness
of poverty. Well and good! Beyond that, do
not shield them from life with a wall of

money. Let them have the priceless
opportunity of building better lives with their
own life-taught wisdom and their own
constructive work.
In my youth I worked as a secretary to a
wealthy

lawyer

who

had

two

sons

somewhat older than myself. These youths
attended the University of Virginia. It
became my duty to make up for each of
them a monthly check for one hundred
dollars as spending money. In those days
a hundred dollars would buy three or four
times what it will today. How I envied those
boys!
When I had been in business college,
learning how to earn my own living, I had
often gone hungry because I literally did not
have a cent in my pocket. I vividly recall
standing in front of a store and longing for

some apples which were priced six for a
dime. At length I went in and sold the
storekeeper on the idea of trusting me for
the dime until I got through school and
began to earn money. Such were my
memories as I made out those magnificent
monthly checks.
By and by my employer's sons came home
with their diplomas. They also came home
conditioned to easy living and with little
idea of what work is all about. Were they
inherently as capable as their father? We
shall never know. One of them was put into
a good job in a bank his father owned, and
another was made manager of one of his
father's coal mines.
Ten years later they had completely
wrecked their father's fortune and his
health as well. I no longer envy anyone, for

envy is no part of peace of mind. As I look
back, I am grateful that I had to undergo
such experiences as negotiating a ten-cent
long-term credit. And I am grateful that,
when I began to earn money, my earning
power became part of my self-fulfilment. I
am even glad that when I made mistakes
and lost money, I had no rich father to see
me through, for I found a mighty teacher in
adversity.
My book Think and Grow Rich has been
read by perhaps seven million men and
women. In the twenty years since it was
published, I have been able to talk to some
of these people, and I see that some have
used the book to help them become truly
rich. But some have used it to help them
become rich in money only. It is time to set

down once more the twelve great riches of
life
. A positive mental attitude
. Sound physical health
. Harmony in human relationships
. Freedom from all forms of fear
. The hope of future achievement
. The capacity for faith
. A willingness to share one's blessings
. A labor of love as an occupation
. An open mind on all subjects
. Self-discipline in all circumstances
. The capacity to understand others
. Sufficient money

These are the riches which can and should
go along with peace of mind. Notice I have
set money in the last place, and this despite
my insisting that it is very difficult to have
peace of mind without sufficient money. I
set it there because you yourself will
automatically give emphasis to money.
Now and then, therefore, I must remind you
to de-emphasize it and remember this
Money will buy a great deal, but it will not
buy peace of mind – it only will help you find
peace of mind. But neither money nor
anything else can help you find peace of
mind unless you begin the journey from
within yourself.
Basic steps in building your income. I
have been told that it is not good logic to
warn people of the dangers of misusing
money, when probably they do not have

enough money to make them worry about
misusing it. I would follow this advice if I
were writing a book merely about how to
earn money. This book also is concerned
with showing you where you are going and
how the world looks when you get there. It
helps you build correct attitudes right at the
start.
As long as we have pointed firmly at those
attitudes, however – as we shall point again
– I shall set down some practical ways in
which a person who has little or no capital
can begin to build his wealth. Each of these
ways is specific unto itself, so to speak, but
is capable of almost infinite modification. It
is up to you to pause as you read and apply
these procedures to yourself, your talents,
your surroundings and, above all, your
goals.

. Get other people to help their own
businesses by helping yours. A young
life insurance salesman was having trouble
in placing policies with heads of families.
Using this adversity as a springboard, he
wondered why he could not sell insurance
to the very same men, not in their role as
heads of families but in their role as
businessmen. After all, money taken out of
the family budget is money gone; but a
business expense offers an opportunity of
bringing back the expended sum many
times over.
He began with a leading restaurant owner
in his town. He pointed out to this man that
he might very well advertise that the food
he

served

was

so

wholesome

and

sustaining that people who ate in his
restaurant were likely to live longer. The

restaurateur said this was indeed so and he
intended to make sure it always was so.
Good, said the insurance man, and
explained the rest of the plan. The
restaurateur was to offer to insure the life
of each regular customer for one thousand
dollars. Details were worked out and the
offer made the restaurant's business boom.
Needless to say, it helped the young
insurance man.
He extended the idea to a group of filling
stations, to a large grocery and to others. I
am not positive it was this man who
originated the idea of adding life insurance
to mortgages so that the mortgage would
be paid off if the purchaser died – but he
certainly made good use of this angle as
well.

Now stop and think How can you get other
people to help their own businesses by
helping yours?
. Show someone how he can get more
for his money. Here we are not talking
about setting yourself up as a business
adviser, so that people seek you out to
learn how they can get more for their
money. We assume that the initiative must
be yours.
Here is how one man did it
Working at a low salary for a distributor of
magazines, he took notice of many
different kinds of printing. As with another
man I have mentioned in this book, he
noticed that many of the printing jobs could
have been done with more taste and style.

Now, this young chap was discovering that
most jobs of any kind are not done as well
as they could be. Take note of this, for a
fortune can be made on the idea.
The young man found out more about
printing, then went to a large printing firm.
He arranged to bring in printing jobs at a 
per cent commission. He then went to large
users of printed matter and collected a
great many samples, which he took home
and studied.
Selecting two or three brochures which
obviously

needed

improvement,

he

arranged with a free-lance commercial
artist to prepare a sample layout for each,
on the promise of a fair fee if the job went
through. An advertising copywriter who had
spare time contributed his own talents on
the same basis. Armed now with a good

"rough" of an improved job, the young man
took the brochures to the firms which had
issued them and simply showed how much
better they could be.
Now, let us look into some of the practical
psychology at work here.
To begin with, a person or a company may
go on almost forever with some condition
or process or product that "gets by." He
may not realize he is merely getting by; or
if he does, he is too busy or too lazy to do
anything about it.
Along comes someone who makes him
dissatisfied with what he has and in the
same moment shows him how to do better.
Moreover, the work is all done for him. Why
not take advantage of it?

Now stop and think How can you show
someone how he can get more for his
money? Extend that How can you help
someone get more for his money in such a
way that he will thereafter depend on you
to show him again and again?
.

Bring

producer

and

consumer

together. The farmer used to have a tough
time bringing his goods to market. Imagine
an isolated farm in hilly country, on a road
that was mostly mud, and with horse and
wagon the only means of transportation.
Still, the farmer had to bring his produce to
town and so he did by hook or by crook.
Everything in our economy intermeshes
with everything else. As the automobile
came in, roads had to be improved and
they were. Now the farmer could carry his
goods five to ten times the distance he

used to and still get home the same night.
Soon someone found he could set up
marketing centers between towns and
draw on the increasing car traffic for
customers while the farmers were very glad
to be a continued source of supply.
Farmers used to depend on peddlers who
came by perhaps twice a year, sometimes
on foot with huge packs on their backs.
Unrolling his pack on the kitchen table, the
peddler would provide the farmer's wife
with needles and the like, the farmer with
tobacco and fish hooks – and above all,
with news. How hungry people used to be
for news! The peddlers invariably had more
money than the farmers, for they performed
the valuable function of bringing producer
and consumer together.

When the farmer wanted to sell or buy a
horse, he often was assisted by a broker
who

helped

both

parties

reach

an

agreement on price, then sealed the
bargain by making them shake hands. The
broker, too, generally made more money
than the farmers because he brought
producer and consumer together.
Recently I read of complaints by shoppers
in the Soviet Union. It seems they spend
endless hours standing on line in front of
separate,

specialized

food

stores.

Eventually they may adopt the American
idea of bringing many producers and many
consumers

together

in

convenient

supermarkets.
Fortunes have been made in this revolution
in

merchandising,

especially

as

supermarkets – and their sprawling parking

lots – have moved into the suburbs and
even far out into the country. Fringe
benefits have come to many property
owners who saw how to ride along with the
trend.
A woman lived alone on twenty poor acres
which had mostly been taken over by scrub
pine. At last she decided to sell the old
homestead. Neighbors told her, sighing,
that she would never get much for it. A local
real estate man made her a pitiable offer.
This woman, however, was one of those
elderly (in years) people who never had
seen any reason why her mind should not
remain alert. She told herself that her farm
must be good for something. She decided
to spend thirty days in an intensive
investigation of what run-down farms are
good for. Before the end of that thirty days

she had found she could sell it as a base
for a riding stable, complete with pasture
and pleasant riding trails, for twice what the
real estate man had offered.
But

also,

she

supermarkets

in

had

studied

the

area

several

and

had

concluded that her farm would make a
good supermarket site. She sold out finally
to a supermarket for five times what the
real estate man had offered.
When roads were paved and transportation
by automobile became so easy, it was
predicted that the mail-order house would
disappear. After all, why should a person
buy from a catalog when he can buy from
the store itself? Such firms as Sears,
Roebuck

and

Montgomery

nevertheless continue to flourish.

Ward

Despite constant rises in postage rates,
thousands of mail order businesses thrive
on selling everything from postage scales
with the new rates printed on them, to
books, household furnishings, preserved
and fresh food, vitamins, equipment for
hobbies, boat supplies ... the list is almost
endless.
Why is this so? Because times may change
but universal needs always continue.
Showing a person that he can write his
name and address on an order form and
drop it into the mail and be assured of
prompt delivery of something he wants,
continues to be a good way to bring
producer and consumer together.
Sometimes the producer sells directly to
the

consumer.

Far

more

often

the

consumer buys from a middle man who

assumes retail selling as his special
function

or

from

a

manufacturer's

representative.
Now stop and think How can you bring
producer and consumer together?
Some of the money you earn should
stay with you. Certainly we have not
exhausted the subject of making money!
You may even feel that in giving the subject
a once-over lightly treatment, I have not
done justice to it. I suggest, however, that
you reread the foregoing three items and
see in how many ways you can relate
yourself to them. They have a great
universality. Stretch them – you need not
be too literal – and you will find they cover
a vast variety of business situations, a
broad horizon of opportunities. Note that
they have not been tied to any particular

craft or skill, since the fields mentioned are
illustrative of many others.
You will find it an interesting exercise to see
how many incidents of your own affairs can
be fitted into one or more of those three
categories. If you will put aside your own
work and see yourself as a consumer, you
certainly will "fit"! We shall touch upon
many other principles which help hardworking men make money.
We still are talking about money and peace
of mind.
Nobody who goes too deeply into debt can
count on having peace of mind. You may
have it for a time, but now and again the
debt comes into your consciousness and
you feel you are not quite your own master;
somebody else owns a piece of you. I am

not talking here of ordinary business credit
without which business hardly could exist,
but more of personal debts.
Having some money laid away is a means
of avoiding the uncertainty and often the
embarrassment that goes with incurring a
personal debt. But saving does more for
you than merely make it possible to spend
the money you save. Saving gives you the
habit of gauging your money against your
needs. It helps to remind you that money is
good only because of what it can buy in
goods and services, and again it helps you
gauge what you need in the way of goods
and services.
The habit of saving does away with the
habit of waste. As saving becomes a need,
through habit, many a man finds he can live
just as well as he did before, on the same

salary, and this even if some prices have
gone up. Why is this? Because he stops
throwing away portions of his money on
needless or frivolous items; he buys more
carefully; he conserves his clothing and
other possessions. He finds out how to
make his money do its absolute most for
him. And he does not do this by forcing
himself into poverty for the sake of building
his bank account. He continues to live at
his general level and finds he can save as
well.
What should you do with the money you
save? There is no single answer that fits
everyone.
I have seen and heard of a good many
instances in which small saved sums – in
one case as little as two hundred dollars –
were used

as

investments

in small

businesses of good promise. Some of
these

investments

paid

back

many

thousand per cent. Of course you cannot
count on this, but bear in mind that an
opportunity arose and a person who had
saved was able to take advantage of that
opportunity without borrowing, without
obligating himself.
A young couple had formed the habit of
buying "on time." They were always in debt.
One day the wife calculated the amount
they had paid out in interest and said,
Never again! The couple was about to give
a party and needed a new bridge table with
four matching chairs. But the wife said they
would play bridge sitting on the rug – and
incur no more debts. They called it Turkish
Bridge and had a hilarious good time.

This experience caused them to put aside
some friends who seemed unable to
entertain without making a show and
cultivate friends who valued friendship
more than display – friends who turned out
to be far more worth knowing. Also they
began to save one-tenth of their income
every week. One day they went shopping
with money in their pockets and found out
this

great

truth

of

merchandising

merchants sell for less when they sell for
cash.
In addition, the husband felt more relaxed
and confident now that he was out of debt
and also had a backlog of money. This
helped him in his job. He was called in for
an interview, during which his employer
asked him casually if he saved money in
any of the local banks (just another way of

asking "Do you save money?") The young
husband's

confident

and

affirmative

answer was the right answer, and he got a
promotion which led to greater things.
Saving is an index of character for it has
much to do with a man's sense of purpose
and his ability to manage his affairs.
I once helped a man start saving even
though he said it was absolutely impossible
for him to do. First, we set up a goal. It was
the purchase of a handsome sport jacket, a
sensible purchase in that he could wear it
in his business as well as during leisure
hours. The price, which would not buy an
equivalent jacket these days, was $..
Then I made this fellow set down every
cent he spent for two weeks. We went over
the list together. The conversation went
something like this

"Can you give up two packs of cigarettes a
week?"
"'Yes."
"Instead of spending fifteen cents a day on
a shoe shine, will you spend a dollar on
shoe shining equipment and shine your
own shoes? And get a better shine for
perhaps two cents?" "Yes."
"Will you spend no more than one dollar on
your lunch?"
"No, I eat with people who like to eat
heartily and ..."
I told him about a lunch I had had with
Henry Ford. I ordered a lobster salad for
three dollars. The billionaire ordered a
sandwich and his total bill was eighty-five
cents. Mr. Ford was not an eccentric about
economizing. He was just a big enough and

peaceful enough man to feel he could eat
what he wished.
The man who could not save now said with
determination ''I'll keep my lunch check
down to one dollar. Yes!" "Well, by saying
Yes three times you've saved yourself at
least ten dollars a week."
"Ten dollars a week!" He was astonished,
then thoughtful. Without my having to
oversee the process, he got himself out
from under a great many other small,
money-eating expenses. He found he now
lived better in ways that counted, and he
saved as well.
Whether or not you are short of money, I
suggest you fill in a list of your own. Think
about expenses you can reduce or
eliminate if you really want to. Set down the

amounts per week, total them, think about
that total, ask yourself what that sum could
buy for you in one week, in two weeks, in a
month, in a year.
This experience is important. Here is a list
to point the way
Shoe shines $
Smokes $
Alcoholic Drinks $
Entertainment of a casual nature $
Gambling $
Bad Debts (are you a sucker) $
Extra Adornment $
Fancy Food $
Items of which only you know $
TOTAL $

 by chapter you are growing more
and more familiar with the Supreme Secret.
Checking on  
Will you master money – or will it master
you?
Once you earn a considerable surplus
above your needs, you should enjoy both
riches and peace of mind. You will have
peace of mind if you have mastered
money, but not if it has mastered you. Too
many

men

use

money

merely

for

conspicuous consumption. Too many,
having millions, live in fear of losing them.
If money or anything else gets in the way of
your peace of mind, take peace of mind
and let the other go.
Money that benefits you comes most often
from work that benefits you

A man needs enough for comfort and a
good share of the world's luxuries. Aiming
at these and retaining his self-confident
faith in himself, instead of straining for
many times more than he can spend, he
often earns much more than he expected.
No father benefits his son when he
surrounds him with money and prevents
him from learning life's great lessons
through honest work. Keep your mind on all
twelve of the great riches of life and know
that your journey toward riches must begin
within yourself.
Basic steps in building your income
One way to build income is to show others
how they can help you succeed by
advancing their own success. Another way
is to show someone how he can get more
for his money. Another is to bring producer

and consumer together, which can be done
in many ways. Always, some of the money
you earn should stay with you. Debts can
rob you of peace of mind. Saving is a habit
which gives you many benefits besides
money in the bank.
How to start yourself in the saving habit
Almost anyone who is short of money can
stop the drain of small, unnecessary
spending. Doing this, you often find better
and more interesting ways to enjoy life. You
can live as well as before because you
augment your ability to handle money. The
ability to save is a good index of character,
and employers know it. Make a list of every
cent you spend on certain items, and you
will open your eyes to the total you spend
– a total which can be saved toward
purchases which hitherto have seemed

beyond your means or kept as a means of
taking

advantage

of

investment opportunities.

low

prices

or

  The Blessed Art of Sharing
Your Riches
Wealth that is shared creates more wealth,
and you can share many forms of wealth
besides

money.

Today's

millionaires

themselves point out that anyone can
become a millionaire because today's
wealth is so wide-spread and gives rise to
so many opportunities. When you share in
your own home you create a basic
harmony which adds to your success and
peace of mind in everything you do. Start
now to share what you have, and when you
have plenty of money you will share your
money the more wisely and with greater
benefit.
YOU are going to make money. If you do
not allow negative points of view to trip you
up, you will march straight forward on the

road to riches. Yes, you are going to make
money in solid sums – money that comes
to you through your own worthy efforts –
money you spend for your own worthy
desires – money you spend in helping
others.
Will you build your character while you
build your fortune? This, as by now you
know, is not exactly "another matter."
There is a strong connection between the
power to make money and the power to
know your own mind and fulfill your own
self as a fully realized person.
Again we shall examine a technique that
goes with being rich and having invincible
peace of mind. So far as sharing money is
concerned, you may see this technique as
belonging to your future. So far as sharing
other forms of wealth is concerned, this

technique is yours right now. Use it and
make it part of you. Life proceeds
according

to

the

great

Law

of

Compensation. The more you give of what
you have, the more comes back to you –
and it comes back greatly multiplied.
He gave away  percent of his working
hours. One of my distinguished students,
Edward Choate of the New England Life
Insurance Company of Los Angeles,
decided to help his government sell War
Bonds during World War II. He devoted 
per cent of his time to this effort for which
he received no direct compensation.
In addition, he gave  per cent of his time
to counseling and training other life
insurance men, his direct competitors. For
this

he

neither

asked

nor

received

compensation. He used the remaining 

percent of his time to sell life insurance on
his own account.
One might think that a man who gave away
 per cent of his working hours would ruin
his business. Let us see. A life insurance
man is considered to do pretty well if he
writes $,, worth of insurance in a
year. During the first three months of one
war year, Edward Choate wrote more than
$,, worth. Most of this was written
in his own office, on the lives of men who
sought him out and asked him to accept
their applications. They were men who
remembered him in connection with the
services he rendered while he was giving
away % of his time.
In giving of his time, Mr. Choate never
hinted that he wanted anything in return.
Yet such is the Law of Compensation that

a return is inevitable. You may wish to look
at it this way every time you share your
blessings with another, you become his
creditor. Eventually, the debt is paid.
Somehow, debts have to be paid.
They gave away a philosophy and it
returned many-fold. One of the most
valuable gifts you can give any man is the
gift of direction. Show him how to gather his
forces and focus them the way he wants to
go, and literally you do more for him than if
you handed him a million dollars. Andrew
Carnegie gave away multiple millions for
the purpose of founding free libraries,
hoping thus to disseminate knowledge of
all kinds and lift the entire knowledge-level
of a nation. Above and beyond this he
made available the Science of Personal

Achievement in which I have played my
own part.
One of the greatest rewards of my life has
been to see my book Think and Grow Rich
given away as a means of spreading the
philosophy. Mr. Choate is one of those who
have given away hundreds of copies.
Often, he gives the book to men who by no
stretch of the imagination ever will become
prospects for life insurance. He gives the
book to others because it helped him find
himself. Undoubtedly it has brought him
business. Undoubtedly it has helped many
a man to be able to afford the life insurance
he needs.
Another student of mine moved to Oakland,
California, with a total capital of less than
two hundred dollars. He invested half his
capital in Think and Grow Rich. He made a

practice of lending the book to his
neighbors, asking only that each person
keep the book one week. At the end of that
time, he would pick up the book and lend it
to some other person. Later he came to tell
me what his habit of sharing his own
philosophy had done for him.
"When I started to lend those books of
yours," he said, "I had no other purpose in
mind than to make friends among my
neighbors by introducing them to a
philosophy which has so much friendship in
it.”
"Meanwhile I had started my machine shop
with one small drill press. Very soon, some
of my neighbors who had read Think and
Grow Rich began to spread the news of my
shop and my philosophy of giving as much
as I can, and business began to pour in. I

never spent a cent in advertising. I never
solicited a single order from anybody."
At last report this man had $, worth
of equipment in his shop and had grossed
more than a million dollars. He said "It
beats anything I ever heard of in my whole
life!" But you hear of it when your ear
becomes attuned to the great art of giving.
It is not a new idea. The great philosophers
of all times have pointed out the riches we
gain when we give away some of our
wealth – of money, of time, of service, of
unpremeditated moments of kindness, and
especially of love.
Giving to those who help themselves.
Any man noted for his millions receives
endless requests for money. He knows that
most of these appeals come from people
who will not use the money for necessities,

let alone in any manner which helps them
in their careers. He cannot hope to screen
all such requests. Often it is far simpler for
him to give large sums to a charity or to
endow a foundation.
Those who have worked for their money
know that the virtue of money consists in its
use, not in its quantity. This is equally true
whether the amount be a dime or a million
dollars. Henry Ford once was approached
by Miss Martha Berry of the Martha Berry
School in Georgia. Miss Berry asked for an
endowment for her school, but Mr. Ford
refused the request.
"Well," she countered, "will you give us a
sack of peanuts?"
Mr. Ford obliged by buying her a sack of
raw peanuts.

With the aid of her students, mountain boys
and girls, Miss Berry planted and replanted
the peanuts, selling the crop until she had
converted the original sack into six hundred
dollars in cash. She then returned to Mr.
Ford and handed him the six hundred
dollars, saying, "You see how practical we
are in the use of money." Mr. Ford handed
back the six hundred dollars, along with
some two million dollars to build the fine
stone buildings which now adorn the
campus of the Martha Berry School in Mt.
Berry, Georgia.
Mr. Ford made very few gifts of this kind.
Experience had taught him that all too often
gifts to schools are handled by impractical
people who know very little about sound
business (or farming) methods. As long as
Martha Berry lived, the Ford private car

appeared on the railroad siding near her
school once a year, while Mr. and Mrs.
Ford paid a visit.
A

present-day

multimillionaire,

Henry

Crown, who arrived in this country as a
poor immigrant from Lithuania, is now a
leading

figure

in

the

vast

General

Dynamics Corporation. Mr. Crown has put
a great deal of money into a plan which
teaches aspiring young people how to
handle capital. He has set up a fund of
eight thousand dollars at a good many
colleges, and this money is invested each
year by the senior economics class. When
the class makes a profit, its members share
the surplus, and the fund is passed on
intact to the next class.
Wealth creates wealth. A large sum of
money in the hands of one man generally

does not create as much wealth as does
money which circulates, provided that
those who handle its circulation are
interested in creating wealth.
A man's happiness and peace of mind
depend on his sharing all kinds of wealth.
Business relations cannot properly be
described as a relationship of love between
buyer and seller; yet when the idea of
service to one's fellow men comes into the
relationship, much that is profitable to both
parties also enters in. "A little bit of myself,"
said

Henry

Ford,

"goes

into

every

automobile that rolls off our assembly lines,
and I think of every automobile we sell, not
in terms of the profit it yields us, but in terms
of the useful service it may render the
purchaser." Thomas A. Edison said "I
never perfected an invention that I did not

think about in terms of the service it might
give others."
The idea that a business should give its
customers more than a product for a price
is not new, and history proves it creates
both

good

businesses

and

good

customers. Good relations between an
industrial employer and his employees,
however, are not very old as history goes.
This is natural enough when we consider
that enterprises which employ people by
the thousand have not been with us more
than a few generations. They are a great
way for the owner of the business to make
money, and unfortunately many a labor
force has been badly treated in the
process.
In past years we had our own era of those
industrial pirates who never thought of

sharing with their employees the wealth
their employees helped to create. While
they made a great show of their money in
New York, Newport or Palm Beach those
men would have sneered at the idea that a
society needs a large number of well-paid
people who are able to buy more goods
and lead better lives.
Millionaires are far more numerous today.
More than five thousand new millionaires
have so declared themselves on their tax
returns in the last decade. Also, as I have
mentioned, today's millionaires do not
seem to want the notice that rich men used
to require. Most of my readers will not
recognize the names of some of the
present-day

millionaires

multimillionaires I have cited.

and

Nor do today's moneyed men seem
anxious to form a definite class to which the
poor may not aspire. I quote Arthur Decio,
who made so much money in building and
selling mobile homes "It's easier to get
ahead than it was fifteen or forty years ago.
Look at the population growth and the
tremendous rise in personal income.... This
country is just loaded with opportunities."
So it is, and many of the opportunities
would not exist if wealth were not better
distributed than it used to be. Employers
have seen the value to themselves, to their
people and to society of taking workers into
partnership with industry. A capitalist
society proves over and over that it is the
best way to create maximum, widespread
wealth.

A victory for the Science of Personal
Achievement. The R. G. LeTourneau
Company is a large employer. Some years
ago, I received a phone call from a former
student who had become one of its
executives. "Please come to see us
immediately," he said. "We have a difficulty
which only you can handle."
When I arrived at the LeTourneau plant I
learned that communistic influences had
entered in the guise of a labor union. The
company wanted help in immunizing its
employees against this "ism," knowing that
if the crisis could be surmounted the men
would realize which way of life was best for
them.
They asked me my fee. "Perhaps there will
be no fee," I replied. "Give me freedom to
act, and if I cannot overcome your trouble

there will be no charge. If I succeed in
eliminating the communistic influences, I
will tell you later what my charge will be."
The deal was closed on that basis. I set up
a cot in the plant and I stayed on duty day
and night.
The basic trouble was twofold the men did
not realize, first, how the company returned
to them part of the wealth they created; and
also few individuals had any idea of their
own power to take their own abilities and
multiply them through the exercise of a
positive mental attitude. Fear of poverty
and other crippling fears ran rampant
among

them.

Belief

in

wealth

and

happiness, and in each man's power to win
his own wealth and create his own
happiness, had been pushed aside by
negative thinking.

Given this ground in which to sow their
seeds of discord, the communist-minded
organizers were able to make those men
believe that their future should be in the
hands of others – that they should reduce
themselves to cogs in a kind of economic
machine; that indeed it was wrong for a
man of faith and ambition to rise where
negative-minded men might not follow.
In combatting the Communists I never
mentioned them. Rather, I taught the
Science of Personal Achievement and that
was all I needed to teach. In a short time
the LeTourneau employees saw how much
greatness each man has within his own
mind – a greatness nobody else can or
should handle for him. They saw what it
really means to work, and the rewards work
brings to a man who has some goal

besides three meals a day and really wants
to achieve his ambition. They came to see
that the rich men of their time owned no
natural power which they themselves did
not own, and all they had to do was to find
their powers for prosperity and use them.
I

succeeded.

When

I

named

my

compensation, I received it immediately.
Eight months later the company increased
my fee. Thus it goes when men realize that
wealth is not something you grab from
another; it is something you build for
yourself out of service to others, sparked
and enhanced by your own positive, joyful
inward drive. This is true wealth and part of
peace of mind. I do not know how many of
those LeTourneau men became rich, but I
know they had reason to bear in mind the

true picture of wealth and share it with
others.
Sharing the wealth in your own home.
You can tell a great deal about a man by
what goes on in his home. Men who are
successful in living – not merely in
mastering the mechanics of some trade –
generally maintain homes in which no one
person has to be "boss" and there is true
love and true sharing.
I have been in the homes of rich men
whose wives had to beg them for money
enough to buy needed articles of clothing. I
have been in the homes of poor men in
which every purchase had to be discussed
lest it leave no money for food; and the
poor home was the happier because of its
atmosphere of sharing, even though the
lack of money was sadly felt.

I have at times been asked to give marriage
counseling,

and

at

times

I

have

recommended that a marriage be broken.
There are many reasons for such a
recommendation, and I assure you the
reasons are not trifling. I have noticed in
such cases that lack of the ability to share
invariably shows itself. Let non-sharing
take hold at any level, in any aspect of
married life, and it leads to other troubles.
You are going to make money, and when
you do, make sure that your wife has a fund
of her own to spend as she wishes. It will
not be "her" fund in the sense that it is
sacrosanct, for if you meet financial
misfortune, she will share this as well in a
good and loving marriage. It will be "her"
money in the sense that it is your

recognition of your wife as a person in her
own right, your partner, not your servant.
I am informed that much of the chatter that
goes on in beauty parlors has to do with the
clever ways in which women get money out
of their husbands. Not a few must resort to
slipping a few dollars out of his pocket while
he sleeps. Others invent charities or dream
up "school expenses" for the children.
Apparently, many a woman is literally
forced into such tactics if she is to maintain
a decent home, for her husband shows no
willingness to shell out more than enough
for a mere subsistence, if that.
On the other hand, many a woman in the
sanctity of Hairdrying Row reveals she has
lost her grocery allowance in playing MahJongg or in some similar pursuit and she
cannot admit this to her husband. The sum

lost is rarely large, and Mah-Jongg is not
wicked; it is the lack of frankness with her
husband that is the truly damaging
condition.
"If you knew how angry my husband can
get," such a woman often says, "you'd
know why I can't tell him." So it takes two
to create the bad situation. Add to this the
fact that many husbands never tell their
wives how much they earn or how much
they may spend on drinks or how much
they lose at poker.
By and large when a man shows he is
willing to share, a woman by her nature is
eager to share lovingly with him. High on
the list of information a man should share
with his wife is the knowledge of how much
money he makes and how he acquires his
money.

Women generally stay at home or close to
home while a man is out somewhere
earning money. When a man comes home
from his job, a woman likes him to bring
with him some of the outside world. It is a
smart man who sees to it that his wife gets
a blow-by-blow description of all he does,
and where he spends his time, without her
having to ask for this information. There are
sexual overtones in this, for a wife may
work up jealousy for no reason, especially
if a man has a job which does not keep him
constantly at a desk or a bench within sight
of others.
Share and you have a marriage; avoid
sharing and you might as well be living
alone. Think back upon the nine basic
motives we discussed in a previous

chapter. To refresh your memory, they are
Seven positive motives
. The emotion of LOVE
. The emotion of SEX
. The desire for MATERIAL GAIN
. The desire for SELF-PRESERVATION
. The desire for FREEDOM OF BODY
AND MIND
. The desire for SELF-EXPRESSION
. The desire for PERPETUATION OF
LIFE AFTER DEATH
Two negative motives
. The emotion of ANGER AND REVENGE
. The emotion of FEAR
It has been said that the first three basic
motives – love, sex and money – practically

rule the world. I would not say this
statement is entirely true, but there is a
great deal of truth in it. A man who has not
truly shared all of his life with the woman of
his choice cannot know the magic of sex
and love in their most sublime combination.
But when a man lives with these motives,
he often connects them like a mighty
dynamo to the third. He makes more and
more money so that he may share more
and more of life's abundance with his wife.
No part of your existence can be lived
separately from all the other parts. When
you are successful in one area, it helps you
to be successful in all other areas. Most
especially, when you have peace of mind
at home you can count on having peace of
mind everywhere.

I'll tell a little story about or perhaps on
myself. There was a time in my life when
changing a flat tire upset me completely.
Now, if a flat occurs on one of my long
drives across the wideopen parts of our
country, I change the tire and am not in the
least upset. In former years I had more
muscle – but in former years, I did not drive
with the woman of my choice beside me, as
I do today.
Everyone has something to share and
gains by sharing it. When a stranger
stops you in the street and asks directions,
you share your knowledge when you tell
him. You do not have to be rich in money in
order to do this. If you are really rich in
human kindness you will give the stranger
a very careful explanation, and perhaps

walk to the next corner with him and point
out the way.
The poorest of us has much to share. In
some ways a poor man has as much to
share as does a rich man. Certainly it is so
with love and with kindness.
I shall suggest three general ways of
sharing which are available to almost
anybody. You may not make use of the
particular instances used as examples, but
the list will serve to open your mind to the
many possibilities of sharing more than
money.
.

Share

your

special

skills

or

knowledge. Many of us possess some
special skill or knowledge which helps us
earn money. We are used to selling our
skill. Now look for a way to give that skill

without thought of gain. A much-needed
clubhouse for boys was built in the slum
section

of

a

large

city.

The

basic

construction costs were provided by a large
foundation, but the clubhouse never would
have gotten started were it not for those
who gave their skills. A lawyer volunteered
his services in drawing up the incorporation
papers and other necessary documents. A
carpenter installed locker room partitions.
A painter gave his own services and also
supervised a volunteer crew which painted
the entire interior in cheerful colors. A
mason installed a concrete ramp at one
entrance so that physically handicapped
boys could make their way in.
. Share by filling a gap where you see
one. Mr. A loaned his lawn mower to his
new neighbor, Mr. B, who had not had time

to equip himself. This was the beginning of
excellent good-neighbor relations between
the two families – but for a while it seemed
as though matters were going the other
way. After Mr. B had trimmed his lawn, he
returned the lawn mower with a big chip in
one blade. Noticing this, Mr. A remarked
diplomatically that Mr. B must have had
some rocks hidden in his grass which
chipped the blade. The new neighbor said
gruffly that the blade had been chipped
when he had been offered the use of the
lawn mower and walked away.
Since the chip was fresh and shiny, this
hardly could have been so. Mr. A said
nothing more, however. He limited his
contacts with his new neighbor to mere
nods if he met him in the street.

One day, Mr. B came around with a brandnew lawn mower and handed it to Mr. A. "I
want you to have this," Mr. B said. "You
see, I knew I'd broken that blade, but I
couldn't afford to have it fixed right then. I
guess I should have said so, but, well, I
didn't. Now things have turned out all right
and I want to do more than merely have the
blade fixed."
Thus is many a non-money debt returned
with interest! Far more valuable than the
lawn mower itself, however, was the
atmosphere of cordiality which the two
families found from then on.
. Share recognition and appreciation.
Notice how often you are recognized as
being in a certain role – for example, the
role of a customer – and so you are treated
in a certain way. Now turn around the

situation and recognize the other person.
You will find it is a limitless form of sharing.
For example, you may stop your car at a
filling station on a hot day. The attendant
rushes up, mopping his brow, anxious to
give you prompt service. You recognize
him as a person who has his own problems
and you say "Take it easy. It's too hot to
hurry." He will remember you the next time
you drive in.
Say you are an employer or a foreman.
One of your men does exceptionally good
work. Many an employer or foreman would
observe that the man is paid to do a good
job, so what? A wiser supervisor will make
a point of telling a worker that his good
performance has been noticed. When a
person does a good job, he is favorably
disposed toward anyone who gives him

recognition.

Furthermore,

he

will

try

thereafter to keep his work up to a high
standard.
You will offer many a kindness, you will
perform many a free service, and in many
cases, you will see no return. Bear in mind
there is always a return within yourself, for
when you give of yourself you make
yourself bigger. And remember the Law of
Compensation which always works in your
favor when you arrange it so. We shall look
more

deeply

into

the

wonders

of

compensation later on.
Look for ways to share your wealth. Never
ask, "What wealth?" In sharing, you will find
you are wealthier than you think. Share
more than money, and when you have
plenty of money you will be more closely
attuned to human needs and your money

will give added benefit to those who share
it.
The Supreme Secret is like a half-hidden
treasure you may pass a hundred times a
day without noticing; yet you see it from the
comer of your eye.
Checking on  
The more you give, the more comes back
to you
Even a man who gave away  per cent of
his working time became richer thereby.
When you share your blessings with
another, you become his creditor and
eventually the debt is paid. You also can
share direction in the form of a philosophy
which leads to peace of mind and great
wealth.

Giving

to

those

who

help

themselves is a highly constructive kind of
giving.
Wealth creates wealth
When a buying and selling relationship
contains the idea of service to one's fellow
men, both sides benefit. Many early
industrial employers took all they could
from their employees and returned as little
as

possible.

Today

wealth

is

more

widespread, and this helps create more
opportunities. A millionaire no longer
attempts to make a great display of wealth,
there

are

increasing

numbers

of

millionaires, and rich men no longer see
themselves as a class apart.
As you create your own wealth you can
create your own happiness

Many people who work for others do not
realize the extent to which they share the
wealth they create, nor how they can create
endless wealth in their own lives through
the power of a positive mental attitude.
Rich men have no natural powers denied
to poor men. Every man carries his
greatness within his own mind, and it is he
himself, and not an outside power, who is
the only one who can bring forth his
greatness.
Sharing the wealth in your own home
Men who are successful in living generally
maintain love and sharing in their own
homes. When couples do not share, other
troubles arise. When a man shows he is
willing to share, a woman is eager to share
with him. Three basic motives, love, sex,
and money are said practically to rule the

world, and this can be seen in many cases.
No part of your life can be lived separately
from the other parts.
Everyone has something to share
You can share knowledge, you can share
love and kindness no matter how poor you
may be. Almost anyone can share in three
areas which offer themselves over and
over; you can share your special skills or
knowledge; you can share by filling a gap
when you see one; you can share
recognition and appreciation of others and
the work they do.

  How to Develop Your Own
Healthy Ego
All your ability and personality show
themselves in your ego. For many a man
the ego works always at full power and for
some it needs restraining. For most, it is as
well to find and use some ego-boosting
device. Your own ego-booster may be
connected with the way you dress, the way
you express yourself, your surroundings,
some object which has symbolic value – or
in some other way which has a special,
individual meaning. The ego can be
attuned to mysterious forces beyond
oneself Through your ego you can be
guided toward an expression of yourself
which reflects in your increased prosperity.
I HAVE spoken before and shall speak
again on the need for knowing your own

mind and going in your own direction. Now
let us look at the ego, that invaluable mind
spark-plug which my dictionary defines as
"the self-assertive tendency of man."
People who have peace of mind also have
healthy egos. Now, to some the term
"healthy ego" brings to mind the picture of
a loud, back-slapping type of person. This
may be so, but it is not necessarily so. Your
ego as you reflect it to the world has been
built for many years out of childhood
influences, later influences and a great
many other factors. Your ego is as
individual as your fingerprints, and what is
"healthy" to you will not be healthy for
another man.
Often ego seems to have a bit of vanity in
it; but it is far stronger and far more subtle
than ordinary human vanity. Think of your

ego as an invisible part of yourself which
makes you strong and resourceful, or puts
obstacles in your way, according to the sort
of influence you feed it.
Even the greatest of minds now and then
find themselves with a run-down ego. Truly
great men feel this, and quickly restore
their egos. The purpose of this chapter is to
show

you

some

of

the

surprisingly

straightforward ego-boosters which others
have used, and to give you an assortment
out of which you may choose and perfect a
tailor-made ego-booster of your own.
The ego that was stronger than a clean
shirt and a shave. It is old advice and
good advice to say that being well-dressed
and well-groomed gives a boost to your
ego.

Now I want you to meet a man who knew
that very well but whose deeply abiding ego
was strong enough to rise above a clean
shirt and a shave.
The impact of this story will be stronger if I
tell it in sequence as it came to me. It
begins with my meeting Edwin C. Barnes
when he was Thomas Edison's business
associate. Mr. Barnes at that time owned
thirty-one expensively tailored suits and in
the course of a month never wore one suit
two days in a row. His shirts were made to
order out of the most expensive fabrics
available. His ties were made to order in
Paris and cost at least twenty-five dollars
apiece.
One day I suggested jokingly to Mr. Barnes
that he let me know when he was ready to

discard some of his suits so that I might
wear them.
"I know you are kidding," Barnes said, "but
you might like to know that at the time I
decided to associate myself with Thomas
Edison, I didn't have the railroad fare to
take me to East Orange, New Jersey,
where I had to go to sell him the idea.
"My desire to get there was greater than my
fear of the humiliation I would suffer by
riding a freight train. I packed a suitcase –
it didn't take long – and I traveled by
boxcar.
"When I walked into Mr. Edison's office and
said I wanted to see him, I heard a titter of
laughter all over the place. Finally his
secretary consented to let me see Mr.
Edison. As soon as I faced the great

inventor, I started telling him how fortunate
he was that I was giving him the first
chance at my services. After I'd talked a
while, he rose, walked all around me,
looked me over with penetrating eyes,
grinned and asked 'What did you come to
see me about, young man?'
"That's how I discovered he was hard of
hearing. Now I had to explain myself all
over, loudly. My clothes were wrinkled and
dusty, my shoes were scuffed, I had a two
days' growth of beard, and I almost lost my
courage. It is to Mr. Edison's credit that he
did not judge me by my appearance. But I
made up my mind, then and there, that
never again would I stand before any man
without knowing that I was better dressed
than he.

"Now you see why I have all these clothes.
And as far as my giving you my discards is
concerned, I doubt if you would get from
them the same ego boost they give me."
He was right. I never have felt the need to
bolster my ego by personal adornment, and
I too am right, for ego is a strictly personal
matter. During the early part of my career I
did stimulate my ego with that large estate
and those elegant cars. Later, when my
work became widely accepted, I became
content with a much simpler style of living.
Yet I do not neglect my ego, which
functions through my Princes of Guidance.
Still, just like Mr. Barnes and so many
others, I see myself reflecting long-ago
experiences which I no longer wish to
suffer. During my childhood I lived amid
poverty and illiteracy, surrounded by

poverty-stricken neighbors. Now I am very
sensitive to the "feel" of any neighborhood
in which I live and it must be just right. I
even inspect the approaches to my home
to make sure they do not lead through any
unpleasant areas.
You may find it instructive to look back at
the early influences of your own life and
see how much they may have to do with
your actions now. Here are some questions
to get you started.
Think a while after each to make sure you
have found the right answer.
As a child ...
Did you have sufficient food, clothing and
shelter?
If the answer is No; was it insufficient by
any reasonable standard or insufficient by

some neighborhood or other standard by
which you have come to judge?
Did your parents, or someone else who had
influence in your life, tend to belittle you
and make you feel that your brothers and
sisters or playmates were better or smarter
than you?
Were you called basically bad when you
misbehaved – or were your actions merely
labeled as unacceptable?
If you were bad by definition, did you
decide you were going to live up to your
badness?
Did you have sufficient schooling in the
three R's so that you never had to feel
inferior, later, about your Reading, Writing
and 'rithmetic?

Are you too short, too tall or too fat, so that
you feel conspicuous?
Are you exceptionally ill-favored as to
appearance, or scarred or crippled?
How would you describe the general
atmosphere in your childhood home?
Peaceful?

Antagonistic?

Clouded

by

worry? Cheerful? Carelessly happy-golucky?
Did your parents quarrel in your presence?
Were you conscious of people using you as
an "easy mark" or a "push-around"?
Were you fond of being the leader in games
and clubs?
Did you set up a symbol of success early in
life, such as "a big house like Mr. Jones's"

or "a job traveling to glamorous places like
Mr. Brown's"?
Did your parents encourage you to accept
responsibility – or were they over-anxious
to do everything for you?
Were you forced to be so much on your
own that you never felt you had anyone
who really cared what happened to you?
Thinking about such questions will suggest
many facets of your past which show
themselves in your present actions. I do not
suggest you worry about your past;
remember, when we close the door on the
past, we close out a great deal which
otherwise might hamper us. At times,
however,

an

understanding

of

past

influences helps you to appreciate and

enjoy your present ways of bucking up your
ego.
A salesman sells through his ego. While
I was engaged in organizing the Science of
Personal Achievement, I made my living by
training salesmen. More than , men
and women came under my guidance while
they were being trained to sell.
The first thing I taught my students was that
before any salesman sells anything to
anyone, he first must sell it to himself. That
is, he must so condition his own ego that it
is in shape to strengthen his statements,
and he must believe that both he and his
product are good.
An executive of the New York Life
Insurance

Company

gave

me

an

interesting case. One man had been with

the company more than thirty years and
had maintained a high selling record.
Suddenly his production dropped to almost
nothing. The salesman could not tell what
was wrong and neither could the company
executives. They called me in to doctor the
"patient."
I went out with this salesman to observe
him in action. Soon I noticed that his basic
trouble, after thirty years in the field, was
the fear that he had grown too old for
selling. He talked constantly about his age.
His fear had developed into hypochondria
and he felt he must use a walking stick to
help him get around.
Somehow, he had persuaded himself that
he "didn't have it" any longer and so he
expected to be rebuffed. He had allowed
his ego to become so thoroughly subdued

that he anticipated a No before he ever
heard it – and that is the best way to make
sure it is said!
Back in the office I said to this man "I want
you to go out and find one of those oldfashioned ear trumpets which once were
used by the hard-of-hearing." He protested,
"But I am not hard of hearing."
"That's right," I said. "You hear too well.
You hear the No before it is said. Now, I
want you to simulate deafness. Place the
trumpet at your ear when anyone speaks,
pretend you didn't hear him and when he
says No go right ahead with your sales
talk."
We agreed that he could not sell life
insurance to someone who really did not
need it or want it, so nobody would be hurt.

He found a monstrous old hearing trumpet
and took it with him on his rounds. In his
first week as a trumpet-user he procured
applications

from

six

out

of

nine

prospective buyers. The next week he
came back with eight applications out of
twelve interviews – an almost unheard-of
record. His ego restored to the Yes habit,
he put away the trumpet and had no trouble
thereafter.
Although my own hearing is fine, I seem
often to come into contact with hearing
troubles. My son, Blair, was born without
ears. How I helped Nature give him
sufficient hearing is another story; I am
thinking now of the time when we sent him
to public school wearing his hair long
enough to hide the absence of ears. The
other children made fun of his long hair,

which was damaging to his ego. We
promptly had his hair cut short; but first I
sold Blair the idea that his affliction would
be a great benefit to him when people
understood about it. And that is exactly
what happened, for people now were kind
to him. He soon lost all self-consciousness
about being different from people who have
ears.
Perhaps I was inspired by Thomas A.
Edison's determination to make an asset
out of his deafness rather than a liability. I
never saw him wear an expression of
annoyance or disappointment. Rather, his
expression clearly said "My ego is under
my control and it does my bidding without
fear or limitation."
Your ego and your opulence. As with the
ear trumpet, I have on many occasions

been able to prescribe exactly the right
ego-builder for a particular person. It
requires knowing the person, of course;
and when you wish to prescribe for
yourself, you will see the importance of that
ancient, great advice Know thyself.
Now and again a man will stop working
before he should and find himself at loose
ends. This was the case with a former
student of mine named Ray Cunliffe. He
had owned a Cadillac agency in Chicago,
which he sold at a handsome profit. Since
he now had plenty of liquid assets, he
decided to take a year and play around and
"rest up," as he put it.
Before the year was out, he grew restless.
He looked around for a good Cadillac
franchise, but found none. Another six
months passed and he began to eat deeply

into his cash reserve for living expenses.
About that time he joined a class in the
Science of Personal Achievement which I
was teaching in Baltimore.
Ray and his wife had been accustomed to
having servants in their home. Now they
had had to let the servants go and do their
own housework. One day while Ray was in
the basement doing the family laundry, it
occurred to him that he was making the
very mistake I had mentioned at a recent
lesson. He wasn't nourishing his ego. He
was starving it; beating it down.
In his excitement and anxiety, he came to
me for personal help. He told me his story,
then asked, "Where do I go from here?"
He had told me that for several years his
wife had wanted a mink coat which would

cost some three thousand dollars. Also, I
could see that although he drove a Cadillac
it was beginning to look shabby; and so did
the clothes he wore.
So I said "Ray, get out your notebook and
pencil while I give you a prescription for
opulence.
"Number One Go to the nearest Cadillac
agency, trade in your present car and buy
a new car of the model you like best.
"Number Two Go to the best fur store in
town and buy your wife a fine mink coat,
even if it costs more than three thousand
dollars.
"Number Three Go to your tailor and have
a complete wardrobe of suits made up.
Then buy the ties and shirts and shoes you
need to go with your new suits.

"Number Four Have the mink coat done up
in gift wrapping. Place the package in your
new Cadillac, hire a liveried chauffeur, and
while you are not at home have the
chauffeur drive the car to your house and
deliver it and the package to your wife.
"Take these four steps immediately. Then
come back for the next prescription; that is,
if you need another. This one prescription
may tum the tide very quickly."
When the new Cadillac and the mink coat
arrived at Ray's home, his wife at first
refused to accept them. The chauffeur
merely handed her the car keys and walked
away, leaving the car in the driveway with
the coat on its seat.
Ray's wife finally tried on the coat. Sure
enough, it was the very coat she had tried

on out of curiosity – and longing – a few
weeks earlier.
Suddenly she felt a surge of confidence
and happiness. The same thing was
happening to Ray. Now, what I have to tell
you seemed like magic to him and it may
seem like magic to you, but it was not
magic.
The cook and the housemaid who formerly
worked for the Cunliffes showed up and
asked if they might return to their old jobs.
Without the slightest hesitation, Mrs.
Cunliffe told them to come right in.
As for Ray himself A friend phoned him
and said "I hear that the Baltimore Cadillac
Agency can be bought. You might look it
over."

Ray looked it over and saw it was good.
The deal required $,, however,
which was quite a sum for him to raise on
short notice. His ego had lifted itself out of
the doldrums. He said "I don't know who is
going to let me have the money, but I know
that I shall get it."
The following day he called on a man he
had been avoiding – a wealthy man toward
whom he had begun to feel inferior. No
inferiority marred his approach now as he
explained he needed $, to put
himself back into business.
"Fine!" was the answer. 'Tm glad to see you
getting back into the business where you
always made money." He wrote Ray a
check for $, and added, "You can
pay this back year by year as your profits
come in."

So Ray Cunliffe was back in a Cadillac
agency of his own and doing a good
business almost before he had had time to
wear all his new shirts. He had only one
disappointment; he was disappointed that I
did not show surprise over his sudden turn
of fortune.
"Well, Ray," I said, "I can't get excited over
something I have seen happen hundreds of
times." But I was pleased, of course, to see
once more that poverty-consciousness can
be replaced by success-consciousness
which invariably draws success as though
with an all-powerful magnet. Ego is the key
to this – an ego filled with self-confident
faith and bolstered by the means that it is
right for you.
You can paint an ego-picture of yourself
and use it for first-aid. Sometimes a man

faces a single situation on which a great
deal depends. Often such a situation
involves another person who must in some
way be persuaded – for whom some
situation must be made attractive. When
you know that other person, often you can
use the power of your ego to give him the
picture he wants to see. Even when you do
not know him personally, you often can
look closely at the values of the situation
and come up with a picture that is attractive
to him.
Let us now look at myself at a stage in my
career when my ego faltered.
I have told how I was associated with Don
Mellett, the newspaper publisher, and how
his murder forced the postponement of
publication of my first manuscripts; also

how it saved me from wearing a Big
Business label.
As I related, I had to get out of town to hide
from the thugs who believed I had been
involved in the attacks upon their illegal
rum-running. In the time I spent hiding, my
spirits were not good. I came close to losing
my faith in my ability to carry out the great
task Andrew Carnegie had assigned me
some twenty years before.
I took hold of myself and decided to break
the bondage of fear. I would find a new
publisher. Since Judge Gary had died, I
had to start from scratch – not an easy task
for the unknown author of a trail-blazing
work.
As my ego rebuilt itself and my successconsciousness

reasserted

itself,

an

insistent inner voice began to tell me that I
would find my publisher in Philadelphia. I
knew no publisher in that city, but the inner
voice became so strong that on a capital of
fifty dollars I got into my car and headed
toward the Quaker City, half believing I
would find the solution to my problem, half
believing I was going mad.
Once in Philadelphia I began to look
through a classified telephone directory. I
hoped to find a cheap boardinghouse
where I could stay for a couple of dollars a
day. Now, follow closely what happened,
for this story is one of the most startling you
ever may read, and it contains – besides its
revelation of the power of ego – a
revelation of the Supreme Secret that can
transform your life.

As I turned the pages of the directory, that
inner voice spoke again. It said "Never
mind looking for a cheap boardinghouse.
Go to the best hotel in the city and register
for the best suite of rooms in the house."
I closed the book and blinked my eyes. I
had less than thirty-five dollars in my
pocket!

But

the

command

was

so

irresistible that I picked up my luggage,
marched to the best hotel in town and took
a suite which cost twenty-five dollars a day.
The moment I signed the register, I knew I
had done the right thing. My ego and my
faith swelled within me. I could not then
have put the Supreme Secret into words,
but I know it took hold of me.
A quarter was a good tip for a bellhop in
those days, but I tossed the boy a dollar.

No sooner had I seated myself in one of the
luxurious chairs than the inner voice spoke
once more.
"You were restrained from registering in a
cheap rooming house because such an
environment would have placed you at a
great disadvantage in dealing with a
publisher. Right now you need an egobooster, and you are getting it from this
finely appointed suite of rooms. Now your
mind can conceive on a positive plane that
brings success. Ready? Call into your
consciousness the name of every person
you know who has the financial means to
publish your works. When the right name
appears, you will recognize it. Get in touch
with that person and tell him what you
desire."

Without a shred of doubt, in perfect faith, I
began to review the names of men who
would be able to finance the world's first
practical

Science

of

Personal

Achievement. After three hours of this my
mind went blank. Then a name popped into
my mind with such compelling effect that I
knew this was the man I wanted. He was
Albert

Lewis

Pelton

of

Meriden,

Connecticut.
All I knew about Mr. Pelton was that he had
published a book called Power of Will, and
that he had advertised this book in my
Golden Rule magazine several years
previously. Immediately I wrote to Mr.
Pelton by Special Delivery. I informed him
that I was about to confer upon him the
honor of publishing the Science of Personal
Achievement.

Two days later I received a telegram saying
Mr. Pelton was on his way to Philadelphia
to see me. I shall never forget the
expression on his face when he was
ushered into my suite, nor the words he
uttered "Well, an author who can live in a
suite of rooms like this must be the real
McCoy!"
The manuscript was about the size of an
old-fashioned family Bible. It contained
 pages and weighed about seven
pounds. I handed it to Mr. Pelton and he sat
down and turned through the pages. After
about twenty minutes he closed the book
and laid it on the table.
He said "I will publish this philosophy and
pay you the regular author's royalty." We
sent for a typewriter and he typed the
contract. At one point he said "I suppose

you'd like an advance on your royalties? I'll
make out a check right now." I replied
nonchalantly, holding fast to the image my
ego had built "Oh, make it any amount you
care to." "Five hundred dollars?" "Okay."
Some months later the first published set of
my work, The Law of Success in eight
volumes, was presented to me. Those had
been successful months in many ways, for
I had regained the power of a positive point
of view. I hope sincerely that those who
read this story will not have to win their own
positive points of view the long way around,
as I did.
Had I been guided by some unseen power?
I believe some outside force was guiding
me. I believe that a mind attuned to
currents of faith is attuned beyond its own
physical dimension. Later in this book I

shall relate another experience of the sort
– actually the experience which resulted in
my writing this book after nearly seventy
years of getting ready.
Since that eventful day in , I have
helped tens of thousands of men and
women to rehabilitate their egos. Most of
them I never have met, for our minds
contacted each other through the pages of
my books. Through my lectures and
personal lessons I also have helped many
thousands to find the same key to the
conceptual and achieving powers of the
mind, and here in many cases I had the
gratification of seeing it happen.
I have developed a considerable ability to
gauge people's needs in this direction and
to "press the right button," so to speak. But
what takes place when the button is

pressed? Whence comes the power that
revitalizes a faltering ego? What is it that
turns a mind from No to Yes and so opens
great gates of accomplishment? I still am
seeking

that

answer.

Perhaps

the

knowledge has been reserved for me to
uncover as a sort of post-graduate course
in my own work, for I never shall be finished
with learning.
Look for your own ego-booster and you
will find it. There are amazing varieties of
ways to boost the ego. Although they may
be mysterious in their inmost essence, their
outward manifestations are clear to see.
Consider the following examples; they are
universal in their application and may help
you find your own.
Among the successful insurance men I
have trained is one among many who

drives an expensive car. His ego-booster is
more individual. It consists of a handsome
golf bag and set of clubs he carries in full
view in his car.
He thus carries with him the impression –
both for himself and for others – that he
spends considerable time playing golf and
is always ready to drive to the links. I do not
know if he would be as successful as he is
if he did not always display this intimation
of success, but I do know that he gets
exactly what he needs as an ego-booster.
Another successful insurance agent I
trained wears an eight-carat diamond ring
which seems to serve as his magic wand
as he talks to prospects. This man is one of
the

largest

Massachusetts
Company.

producers

for

Mutual

Insurance

Life

the

Once he took his diamond ring to a jeweler
for a new mounting. The job required a few
days. During those days he worked harder
than

usual,

used

every

persuasive

argument he always had used in order to
write a policy, and yet failed to make a sale.
He said that when he began to talk to a
prospect he would look down for his ring;
the ring was not there and somehow, he
could not put himself over.
When the ring was back on his finger this
man went to work as usual, and out of his
first

six

interviews

he

received

six

applications for insurance – a record he
never had made before.
As for myself, if I were caught in public with
such a searchlight on my finger, I would
feel so self-conscious that I would get in my
own way and be unable to command my

ego. To each his own, and a mighty power
comes to the man who knows himself!
When a man comes to himself, discovers
his ego and takes possession of it, the fact
is revealed to the whole world. It is reflected
in the tone of his voice, in his facial
expression, in the lift of his motions, in the
clarity of his thought, in the definiteness of
his purpose, in a positive mental attitude
that brings out in others the desire to
believe in and work with this man.
Friend, when you become commander-inchief of that very core of your mind, your
ego, you are master of all you survey. You
never

will

want,

because

you

will

unhesitatingly find the way to plenty. You
never will fear, because your mind will not
contain fear. You will be free, gloriously

free, living a life that pays you in your own
terms.
Some few there are who need reins upon
their egos. They are so rare, however, that
we need not write any part of this book for
them.
A healthy ego is a means of health and
peace of mind beyond comparison. Look,
then, for the one right method or object or
condition which helps you to fulfill yourself
in "the self-assertive tendency of man."
Study the ways of any successful, happy
people you know. Chances are that they
possess and use the Supreme Secret.
Checking on  
What it means to have a healthy ego

Your ego is the mind-power which helps
you project yourself and your desires. It can
make you strong and resourceful, or put
obstacles in your way, according to the sort
of influence you feed it. We are familiar with
the ego boosting power of being well
dressed, but a strong ego can rise above
any limitation. When a man can afford to
assert his ego in the ways he prefers, these
ways often reflect long-ago influences.
A salesman sells through his ego
A good salesman knows that he is good,
and

his

product

is

good,

and

this

confidence rarely falters. Sometimes a
salesman's success hinges upon some
ego-sustaining factor, or some outside
circumstance may so affect his ego that he
slides from a Yes attitude into a No attitude.
A salesman may even assume his hearing

is poor in order that he may filter the Nos
out of his dialogue with a prospect. With a
salesman or with anyone else, a real
physical handicap can be a lifelong
drawback or lifelong stimulus – depending
upon the power of the ego.
Your ego and your opulence
When the ego is strong it attracts success.
When the ego falters, it can be restored by
making sure that every appearance and
self-image is in its favor. A man who is used
to living well, but has lowered his standard
of living, can restore his prosperity by first
restoring the feeling of prosperity that
comes with appropriate possessions and
actions. Even when an appearance of
prosperity is assumed for a short time, it
can prove the turning-point because that is
what the ego needed. The ego may thus be

guided

by

mysterious,

all-pervasive

powers.
Look for your ego-booster and you will find
it
Ego is a highly individual matter. Observe
the ways in which others boost their egos
and you may be helped to find your own
ways. Sometimes it is in the means of
expressing ourselves that we best sustain
our own egos, as in writing instead of
speaking, or vice versa. When you find
your own best way to boost your ego, you
have found a great treasure.

  How to Transmute Sex
Emotion into Achievement Power
It is within every man's ability to transmute
some of his sex emotion into a dynamic
drive which brings success. This ability
grows with your willingness to use it. Young
men often make the mistake of seeing only
the physical side of sex, so that they are in
their forties or beyond before they begin to
use transmuted sex energy to add value to
everything they do. There is no interference
with the physical side of sex, which in itself
becomes a life transforming power.
NOW and then a book "catches fire" and
the author of that book has the satisfaction
of knowing he has added something
permanent to the knowledge of man. So it
has been with my book Think and Grow
Rich. Although it is only one of several

books built around the Science of Personal
Achievement, probably more copies have
been sold than of all my other books
combined.
I have asked a number of people why they
think Think And Grow Rich has sold so
briskly for almost thirty years, and why it
seems to be off to a fresh start in a slightly
revised edition. These people tell me the
book is somehow more inspirational than
the others – and I think I know the reason
why.
I wrote it twice. The first time was in ,
while I was on the staff of President
Franklin D. Roosevelt, merely as a means
of keeping busy while I waited for the
crippling atmosphere of fear to pass. As I
recall, I just sat down and wrote while I was
serving the President without making any

effort to condition my mind so that personal
magnetism would be projected into the
book.
It was some years later that I decided to
publish the book. When I reread the
manuscript, I saw it lacked something. The
answer to what it lacked actually was
inherent in one of the chapters, a chapter
on sex transmutation of which this present
chapter is a summing-up and a carryingforward. I had written a book full of
information but lacking in transmuted sex
emotion. Now I rewrote it from start to finish
and the effect has been electrifying.
Anything you do can be electrifying and
positive and profitable when it is infused
with sex emotion.
Lest there be any confusion, let me state
emphatically what you may be doing need

have no connection whatsoever with the
physical manifestations of sex. Nor does
language have anything to do with it. The
"something" I injected into Think and Grow
Rich during its rewrite has carried over into
all foreign-language editions of the book. It
is just as inspirational in Brazil, for instance,
where it appears in Portuguese, as it is in
English.
What is sex transmutation? Let us first look
at sex itself. Nature has provided that the
vegetable and animal kingdoms know sex
activity only in certain seasons. Man,
however, knows sex activity in every
season.
Perhaps that is why sex makes so much
trouble for so many people. They may keep
themselves wilfully ignorant of sex because
they are afraid of it; they may debauch the

sex instinct because they want to show
they are not afraid of it or because they
simply let it run away with them.
In either case, sex loses the deep force and
meaning it has for man and only for man.
Consider a certain class of professional
religionists who advertise sex as a cardinal
sin, who lump hell and sex together and
come

out

against

both

as

being

approximately equal and equally evil. Such
men say they are saving souls when in
reality they are shriveling them.
On the other hand, we have the prevalent
phenomenon of vulgar scribblings and
pictures in public toilets. This is a twisted,
sad outlet for the sublime sex emotion. Too
many people are caught up in one extreme
or the other; and as for the actual physical
expression of sex, too many never find out

how much of the spiritual is tied in with the
physical.
When you see sex as the great creative
force, creative not merely of children but
also of all that is noble and enduring then
you

are

ready

to

see

what

sex

transmutation can do for you. It is a
focusing of sex energy into other channels
where it adds immeasurably to one's power
of achievement. It is not in any way a
lessening of sex energy but rather a shifting
of that energy, as though a central
powerhouse had, for the time being, sent
its pulsations into a different transmission
line.
It is also a focusing of personal magnetism,
which is really no different from sex energy.
If you are more familiar with the term

personal magnetism, well and good; but
remember it is rooted in sex.
Successful people tend to be highly
sexed. Some years ago I operated a
school of advertising and selling. One day
my secretary announced that I had a caller
who looked like a tramp. Perhaps because
I remembered the man who became
Thomas Edison's associate, I asked her to
send the tramp in.
He was shabby, he wore a three days'
growth of beard, and the cigarette dangling
from his lips as he walked in showed he
either did not know or did not care about
politeness. He was selling advertising
space in the World Almanac, a medium I
never had used because I did not think it
was suitable for my business. Despite the
fact that this unkempt man gave me a bad

first impression – despite the fact that he
scattered cigarette ashes on my carpet –
he left my office with an advertising order
for more than eight hundred dollars.
This man certainly had psychological
troubles but above and beyond them he
had a tremendous personal magnetism. I
heard it in his voice, so I listened to him. I
felt it in the aura of his personality. For the
first time I really gave deep consideration
to the World Almanac's advantages –
which proved out fairly well. But if that man
who automatically used the principle of sex
transmutation had straightened himself out
in other ways, he might have owned the
World Almanac instead of merely being
one of its "space men."
I now watch for the phenomenon of sex
transmutation in everyone I meet and have

thought back upon others I have known. It
is obvious that those who win the greatest
success in all occupations and in all walks
of life have high sex capacities which they
transmute at will. They may not know they
are doing it, but that is what they do.
There is an obvious connection with ego;
and as with ego a person may have to
search for the best way in which to express
himself through sex transmutation.
When I was a member of the Chicago
Rotary Club, one of our guest speakers
was the late Dr. Frank Crane. Here was a
man who had fine things to say, yet he had
no gift of speaking. Even his appearance
was against him. He bored everybody
present, including myself.

After our meeting I walked down the street
with Dr. Crane and we spoke frankly about
the cold reception his talk had received. I
gave him great credit for his message,
which

was

unusually

good

–

but

unfortunately it had been spoiled by his
delivery, and he knew it. He told me he was
the pastor of a small church and barely
made a living. He asked me what advice I
might have to give him.
I had been thinking. I told him he had a
capacity for profound thought which he
could put across in a popular, easily
understandable way. Rather than do this by
voice, however, he should do it in writing. If
he worked up a newspaper column of
sermonettes and syndicated it, he would
reach thousands of people where now he
reached

only

a

small

flock,

and

undoubtedly would increase his income as
well.
"That sounds like a splendid idea," he said
thoughtfully. We shook hands and parted.
After a time, I began to see his daily column
of sermonettes. Some years later he
learned I was his neighbor at a New York
hotel and he invited me to drop in. He had
just completed his annual tax report, and
with a broad smile he handed it to me. His
net taxable income after all deductions
amounted to something more than $,
for that year.
The late Billy Sunday expressed his
undoubted sex magnetism in the way
which was natural for him – through the
spoken word, to tremendous audiences.
He chased the devil up one side of the

country and down the other, swaying
crowds as few other preachers ever have
done. He was so successful that his
religious

campaigns

became

big-time

business ventures which were managed by
Ivy Lee, a well-known public relations man.
Some said that Billy Sunday's success was
due to his high spiritual qualities. Those
closest to him believed his power came
from his highly sexed nature, plus his ability
to transmute sex emotion into sermons
which were so fiery that even the devil
could not withstand them.
Watch for the "something extra" and
you will see it. In every generation there
are only half a dozen men who are
universally recognized as "great" violinists.
Some hundreds play the violin very well,
but beyond them stand the few who have

that something extra. It is the more
successful transmutation of sex emotion.
Of course the same applies to pianists and
to other musicians. As I write, Arthur
Rubinstein is in his eightieth year, and
commentators say that he is not only
perhaps the greatest pianist who ever lived,
but that his performances always seem
fresh and new. Rubinstein is also a great
lover of life, a participator rather than an
observer – and all this points to a deeply
sexual nature and a transmutation of its
wonderful emotion.
It is the same with political leaders, with
lawyers, with athletes, with craftsmen. I
discovered that a highly sexed bricklayer
could lay nearly twice as many bricks in a
day as a man who lacked that intensity, and
lay each brick with the greatest skill,

provided he had learned the art of keeping
his mind on his work.
Looking back into history, we can see that
many outstanding men in many different
fields were known to have a considerable
sexual drive. (History alone may not tell you
this; but a study of biography will). I shall
set down a few names which may start you
thinking
•

George Washington

•

Robert Bums

•

Benjamin Franklin

•

Thomas Jefferson

•

William Shakespeare

•

Andrew Jackson

•

Abraham Lincoln

•

Enrico Caruso

•

Ralph Waldo Emerson

Note that these men were not the victims of
their

sexual

drive;

they

were

its

beneficiaries. They transmuted sexual
energy into the energy of their individual
accomplishments. You are not likely to find
a single man in the history of civilization
who achieved outstanding success that did
not arise from his sexual nature. This
applies to soldiers, statesmen, great
thinkers, great explorers and other men of
action, painters – all kinds of men, and not
necessarily men of virtue. The sexual drive
does not exist of itself, but as a part of the
entire personality. Without it, however,
much ability remains undiscovered.

I also have seen many instances in which
sexual energy appeared to be the igniting
spark, so to speak, of the "sixth sense."
This great creative faculty lifts brain action
far above its ordinary limitations. It is the
psychological receiving antenna of those
inspirations we call hunches. Surely it
accounts for the "still, small voice" which
now and then gives priceless guidance to
the perceptive mind.
I knew a great orator who planned his
speeches well, yet at one point in every
speech he would abandon his plan, pause
very briefly and close his eyes. What
followed when he opened his eyes would
be the climax of his speech, so stirring that
he often brought an entire audience to its
feet. In that pause of two or three seconds
I believe he focused all of his sexual

magnetism and his creative imagination
into a great receptive force which never
failed him. In his own words "I do it
because then I speak through ideas which
come to me from within."
The late Dr. Elmer Gates was one of the
world's greatest scientists, although he
never publicized himself. He patented
more than two hundred inventions, many of
which were created through a very
significant method.
He had what he called his "personal
communications room." It was lightproof
and soundproof, equipped only with a small
table, a chair, a pad of writing paper and
some pencils. When Dr. Gates desired to
focus his forces, he would shut himself into
this room, sit at the table, and concentrate
upon the known factors of the invention

upon which he was working. Soon ideas
would begin to flash into his mind
concerning the unknown factors of the
invention.
On one occasion he wrote rapidly for three
hours, hardly aware of what he was writing.
When at last he examined his notes, he
found they contained principles which had
been discovered nowhere else in the
scientific world. These principles solved the
problem – and broke ground for other men
to follow.
Dr. Gates earned large fees merely by
"sitting

for

ideas."

Imagine

a

large

corporation paying an outsider merely to sit
in his room and think!
We cannot tell exactly where experience
leaves off and intuition begins. It has been

said that genius consists of the ability to
see the patterns of things and project those
patterns. The quiet focusing of inward
forces surely is a great aid in summoning
odds and ends of knowledge through the
subconscious mind and forming them into
patterns never seen before. Yet beyond
this lies the Unseen which gives life to it all.
And can this somehow be a function of
sex? Why not – when all the world is male
and female, and even the basic building
blocks of the universe are oppositely
charged particles which constantly interact.
In essence, sex transmutation is the ability
to switch a desire for physical contact to a
similar desire for expression – in art,
literature, science, selling or anything else.
The switch may be done so habitually that

it is not a conscious act – but it always is
there.
Transmutation of sex emotion in no way
interferes with the natural sex act when
performed at an appropriate time. While the
energy is being transmuted, however,
there is no desire for the physical act.
Something else that is very vital and
important is being accomplished with the
same energy.
Yes, when you watch for the "something
extra" you will see it. And when you watch
for what could be the something extra but
instead

has

become

the

something

wasted, you can see that too. You can see
clearly that many a man who could
succeed does not succeed because he
does not understand that sex is more than
physical passion.

A lesson to learn while you are young.
Remember, it is never too late to start living
a wonderful new life. The potential always
is there, and the means are available to any
person who will reach out and take them.
Undoubtedly, however, certain lessons are
better learned while one is young. Thus, it
is with the use of sex energy.
A highly successful businessman told me
that if he had learned the art of sex
transmutation during his high school days,
he could have become a multimillionaire in
his early twenties. He was well along in his
forties before he discovered that sex is an
energy which can be directed into many
channels.
This remark caused me to study the ages
at which successful men generally become

successful. It was interesting to observe
that most of them did not succeed in a big
way until they were well past forty, often
fifty or sixty or seventy.
Success is good at any age, but the sooner
you find it, the longer you will enjoy it.
Success does depend somewhat upon lifeexperience; yet notice that I said most of
those successful men did not succeed till
they were past forty. An appreciable
minority did succeed before they were
forty, and one could see that they had
learned the art of sex transmutation.
What generally happens is this A man who
is bursting with the physical energies of
youth

gives

himself

to

the

physical

expression of sex. It does him no harm that
he can see, so he never realizes how much
of that energy could be doing him good in

building his career, building his peace of
mind, keeping him more alert and receptive
to the ideas of his business.
Transmuted sex energy could be adding
warmth to his handshake, strength to his
voice, attraction to his personality. It could
help him be known as "one of those people
it's good to know" and to be admired for
being "one of those fellows who are on the
ball." Since his sex energy is being used in
purely physical sex expression, however,
he does not know what he is missing . . .
until many years later when he realizes why
he may have missed success.
A man's love life, shared with the woman of
his choice, can be a wonderfully sustaining
force behind his career – while all the while
it is sweet and good for its own sake.
Sometimes a woman must point out

tactfully to a man that she depends upon
him sexually in ways which go beyond the
marriage bed. In his role as provider he is
still a sexual being, drawing upon sex
energy if it is there as a basic energy that
builds wealth. He should therefore keep
some reserve of this energy so that
consciously or unconsciously he can
transmute it. Moreover, he will be the better
off in that he exerts some self-control and
self-mastery – a strictly human power
which lifts us far above the animals.
A man past forty is more likely to find this
out

for

himself

and,

as

with

the

businessman I mentioned, wonder why it
didn't happen sooner. Men in their twenties
and thirties who read this are urged to
pause for an hour of thought.

The power of love's partnership. For
some people it seems impossible to
understand that sex has three great
functions in the life of civilized man besides
giving pleasure.
() It is necessary for the perpetuation of
mankind.
() It aids in the maintenance of health, as
does the proper exercise of any other
natural function.
() Transmuted into other channels, it
works hand in hand with ego to bring out
everything in a man that wishes to achieve,
that wishes to excel, and stimulates him
with added energy, strength of personality
and resourcefulness.
On the other hand, it can wreck a man's
career, health and fortune – but this is a

misfunction and not the fault of sex but the
fault of the man.
Some people never really make the effort
to combine all of the functions of sex in their
lives, perhaps because they think they are
"overemphasizing sex" in giving it such
importance. This is a prudish attitude and
like all extreme attitudes must do harm.
Some insist on believing that when a man
channels sex energy into his business, he
takes the first step in wrecking his home. Of
course, homes have been wrecked by men
so much in love with making money that
they forgot they were married; but let us
look at a brighter side of the picture.
This particular story came to me not long
ago from the man who is living it. It is not,
however, the first time I have heard a

similar story. I could tell you the same
anecdote about a manufacturer of trolley
car conductors' uniforms (about );
about an operator of an early "flying circus"
(about ); about a subcontractor of
World War II life-boat equipment. In short,
the story is timeless. Right now it happens
to concern a man in the rapidly growing
field of micro-electronics. He is involved in
a technology which has to invent itself as it
goes along, and his problems are multiplied
beyond ordinary business problems.
When

this

man

faces

an

important

decision, he never makes up his mind until
he has had a sex relationship with his wife.
Then, in love's partnership, he feels both
rested and invigorated. On the following
morning he makes his decision and acts
upon it. His record of making good

decisions is reflected in his success, and I
am certain he transmutes a good deal of
sex energy into his business. This couple is
known for the happiness of their marriage
and the harmony of their home.
Another man told me privately that in the
very climax of the loving sex act with his
wife he receives flashes of inspiration
which have guided him correctly in all his
affairs. I daresay this is unusual, yet it
serves to show that sex does not exist in a
separate compartment of our lives but
permeates our entire existence.
The women who make a man's world. It
has been said "Behind every man stands
a woman." This statement is not  per
cent true; but when you find an instance in
which it is not true, you are well advised to
ask Why not? You will occasionally meet

some rip-roaring character who says he is
man enough to do without the influence of
women, but the chances are he is not able
to get along with women or with men either;
or he may have such deep inner doubts of
his

own

manhood

that

he

over

compensates for his lack.
Man's greatest drive comes from his desire
to please and protect women! The hunter
of prehistoric days who brought back two
bears to the cave when his neighboring
caveman brought only one, surely looked
forward, not merely to eating the extra
bear, but also to the pride he would take in
showing it to his woman. Today's "hunter"
brings home the means to buy comforts
and luxuries far beyond what is needed
merely to maintain life, and if he is honest,

he will tell you proudly that he does it for his
woman.
That strange and great man, Abraham
Lincoln, was not happy with his wife. She
was not the woman he had intended to
marry. That woman, Ann Rutledge, died
before she could marry him, and her death
was one of the many misfortunes which
molded his greatness. The power of the
young frontier girl has extended from her
grave into all of our subsequent history.
I am pleased when a man who has made a
great deal of money, or wields a great deal
of power, or both, expresses his homage to
his wife. Often, she is a quiet little person,
yet you know the influence she has had
upon that man and you know they always
have been and always will be partners. You
see success, you see the symbols of sex –

a man and a woman and you know that this
life has been lived completely.
Your mind has many powers, and when
you find the Supreme Secret you will know
you have found the key to every mindpower you possess.
Checking on  
Transmuted sex emotion can electrify your
life
The same book can be written twice and
gain a great force because the second time
it was written with transmuted sex energy.
Unlike the animals, man knows sex activity
in every season, and this may be one
reason why sex is so often misunderstood.
Sex often is labeled as a cardinal sin to be
avoided; often it is debauched; often it is
made vulgar. When it is seen and used as

the great creative force of life, it can, at the
right times, be focused away from the
physical act and become a source of
lifelong achievement.
Successful people are highly sexed
Even a salesman who looks like a tramp
can put over a difficult sale through the
power of transmuted sex emotion. Religion
often receives its force through sex
emotion. Great artists know how to channel
their sex energy into their artistry. Expert
workmen as well show the good effects of
transmuted sex emotion. looking into
history, we can see that many men made
their mark upon the world by transmuting
sex energy into the energy of their
individual accomplishments.
Sex energy and the "sixth sense"

Because it is strongly allied to the ego, sex
energy can lift brain action far above its
ordinary limitations. A great orator used his
sex energy to give him climactic ideas with
which to sway his audiences. A great
scientist used the same dynamic force to
solve

the

problems

of

invention.

In

essence, sex transmutation is the ability to
switch a desire for physical contact to a
similar desire for expression in some other
field.

This

transmutation

in

no

way

interferes with the natural sex act.
A lesson to learn while you are young
Most men do not become really successful
till they are past the age of forty. Their
success often is delayed because in their
earlier years they placed too much value
upon the physical expression of sex and
never realized how much it could add to

their money-making power. Sometimes a
woman must point out to her husband that
sex energy has significance beyond the
marriage bed. In a well-rounded life that
knows the partnership of love, the physical
act of sex becomes both a source of
happiness and a source of strength that
builds a career.

  To Succeed in Life, Succeed in
Being Yourself
Only the man who has found his true self
can know himself, find his own best talents
and achieve his own high success. We
need to live our own lives, and this attitude
should be instilled in childhood. With being
yourself comes self-control, a mighty
source of strength in handling both
circumstances and people. Beware lest in
trying to pile dollar upon dollar you give up
too much of yourself, for that man is truly
rich who owns his own mind as well as his
own fortune.
"LIVE your own life!" I said in the first
chapter. Now, as planned, we return to the
same great theme. I hope you are now
completely receptive to the idea of being
yourself and living your own life. By now

you have seen how much this inward
quality has to do with setting free your
mightiest powers.
Likewise, you have seen that in this book I
have paid some attention, but not very
much, to the "nuts and bolts" of earning a
very good living. The reason is not that
"nuts and bolts" are not important; they are
very important. This book, however, is
devoted to helping you find and use the
basic drives that make a man. When you
have read this book – when you have read
and mastered this book – the "nuts and
bolts" come readily to your hand and you
possess the skills which transfer those nuts
and bolts into a mighty edifice of good
fortune. When the basic drives are not
under

your

conscious

control,

the

components of a rich, rewarding life lie

scattered and you may spend most of your
life searching for some missing part.
We return, now, to the art of living your own
life and being your own self and shall look
further into the ways in which this master
skill strengthens and sustains you. One of
these days you will be in a clothing store. If
some salesman tells you "This is what
everyone is wearing this season," don't be
persuaded. Be yourself. Select colors,
fabrics and styles which suit you. Tell the
salesman that you prefer something that
everyone is not wearing. Either walk out of
that store without having made a purchase
or buy with regard to your own tastes only.
One of these days you will be in a
restaurant. Waiters often receive word from
the proprietor or from the cook to "push"
some item, perhaps because it brings a

high profit, perhaps because there is too
much of it at hand. If your waiter urges
some item upon you, smile, shake your
head, and order exactly what you would
like to have from the menu.
You may greatly admire some person for a
particular skill or talent he shows. Wishing
to exercise a similar skill, you may decide
you are going to "be" that person. You will
have wasted a great deal of time and effort
before you discover that personality is a
very subtle thing and that nobody can "be"
anyone else without harming his own
personality and crippling the drives that can
make him great in his own right.
In my youth I decided to write the way
Arthur Brisbane wrote. He was a very
versatile and capable writer with a huge
following, and I thought I was being smart

when I set out to copy his style. A friend
brought me up short when he remarked
that if I copied Brisbane, I would never
develop a style of my own. Right then I put
Brisbane aside, and the success of my
writings has justified my decision not to be
Arthur Brisbane but to be Napoleon Hill.
Children try to imitate older people, which
is understandable. I see many a grown-up
child trying to keep up with the Joneses
financially or trying to keep up the social
pace that the Smiths set, with disastrous
results. Until you are willing to be your own
self, at your own level, you cannot know
yourself, nor know what your mind can
accomplish.
Let nobody bribe you away from being
yourself. You are going to make money,
and as soon as you do, others are going to

see you have what it takes. Fine! – but this
is the point at which many a man loses
himself. Having built himself from within
himself,

and

having

thus

attracted

attention, he yields to a "big opportunity" to
stop building his own wealth and peace of
mind

and

ties

himself

to

another's

business.
I have been told about a man who sits in a
plush office in a huge company that
supplies essential components in the field
of aerospace. He does not work hard,
earns a six-figure salary and bonuses
besides. He can gratify almost any
reasonable desire that can be gratified with
money. But he cannot buy back himself; he
allowed himself to be bribed away. So he
sits gloomily behind his five-hundred-dollar
desk and wishes he had not let the big

company

buyout

the

small,

growing

company which once had been his own –
and with it buy all the adventure and
personal satisfaction he had known.
Back in the days when $, would buy
what $, buys today – and I was not
earning half of $, a year, but I was
absorbed in what I was doing – I worked
hard and happily at publishing the Golden
Rule Magazine. Perhaps because I had
been an adviser to Woodrow Wilson, I was
approached by Ivy Lee, the public relations
expert I have mentioned. He wanted me to
join his staff and become a ghost-writer for
one of his clients – the Rockefeller
interests.
For a moment I was tempted. I listened to
his terms $, a year on a five-year

contract, and of course I was to knock
Golden Rule Magazine in the head.
The moment passed, and I was myself
again. I replied, "Nothing doing, Mr. Lee." If
the salary had been a million dollars a year,
my answer would have been the same.
Later, of my own free will, I gave up my
association with Golden Rule Magazine.
Did I then wish I had accepted Ivy Lee's
offer? Not at all. My name and my career
remained my own. I retained and still retain
the right to travel under my own name in
any direction I wish to go, assuming full
responsibility for my mistakes, taking full
credit for my successes.
People told me at the time that I had made
a great mistake in turning down that
handsome offer, and even urged me to get

in touch with Mr. Lee and see if the offer
still was open. If indeed it had been a
mistake, I told myself, I had only to
remember that every misfortune carries
within it the seed of a greater benefit. And
when I look back at what I have
accomplished by way of extending the
secrets of happiness and life-success over
a large portion of the world, I see that only
in being myself have I succeeded in being
successful.
Today – right now – start doing all you can
toward being yourself. As you enter a
clothing store, or a restaurant or any other
establishment in which you will be served –
in exchange for your money – decide firmly
and quietly that you are going to be
yourself. In your talks with others, in your
own personal dealings, in whatever you

may do that is shared with others or affects
others – be yourself. I mention other people
because it is most often in our relations with
others that we neglect to be ourselves –
and you can be completely yourself, and
appreciated for what you are, while you still
respect the rights of others.
In the Foreword I listed a number of
blessings which are associated with peace
of mind. I pointed out that peace of mind is
the peaceful base upon which we erect a
good deal of life dynamic. Now, somewhat
overlapping the same list and somewhat
extending it, I am going to set down fortythree items which pertain to being yourself.
Few people will recognize themselves
completely in this list, but if you will take a
pencil and check each item that you

sincerely believe applies to you, it will be
most revealing.
. The man who consistently is himself
maintains

his

poise

under

all

circumstances, whether the circumstances
are favorable or unfavorable.
. He has control of his emotions at all
times.
. He has perfect self-reliance and selfconfidence in everything he undertakes.
. He does not allow himself to be hurried
into any careless action.
. Increasingly, as he succeeds, he
controls his own working hours and the
conditions under which he works. .
. He never gripes or complains about
anything or anyone.

. He never slanders or condemns anyone.
. He never talks about himself unless it is
necessary, and then never in a spirit of
boasting.
. He is open-minded on all subjects, with
all people.
. He does not fear anything or anyone.
. He moves about his affairs with quiet
definiteness of purpose.
. Before expressing an opinion he makes
sure he has the facts, and he is not afraid
to say, "I do not know."
. He has no racial or religious prejudices.
. He eats moderately and avoids every
other form of excess.

. Without pretending to be an expert on
all subjects, on all subjects he thinks for
himself.
. He is a dependable citizen who cannot
be influenced by any "ism" which may be
detrimental to his country or its economy.
. He gives nobody any reason to be his
enemy (but you cannot help it if someone
dislikes you because of your success).
. He is at peace with himself and with all
mankind.
. He cannot ever be poor or miserable,
for, come what may, in his heart he remains
happy and prosperous.
. All the members of his family love him
and thrill to the sound of his footsteps when
he comes home.

. He expresses his gratitude daily for all
of his blessings and shares his blessings
with all who have a right to claim a share.
. He seeks no revenge for any wrongs or
injustices done to him.
. When he speaks of others, he makes
every effort to avoid mentioning their faults
no matter how much their faults may have
affected him.
. He looks into the future by studying the
past and recognizes that history has a way
of repeating itself, that eternal truths do not
change with the times.
. He maintains a positive mental attitude.
. He is slow to accuse, quick to forgive.
. When others make honest mistakes, he
makes allowances for them.

. He will not profit in any transaction if it
harms anyone else.
. He keeps himself free from the
bondage of debt.
. Having acquired all the wealth he can
use beneficially, he does not strain after
more yet he knows with full assurance he
can earn more if it should be advisable.
. He converts all adversities and defeats
into assets.
. Facing defeat, he knows all defeat is
temporary.
. He has a major objective in life and
keeps himself busy attaining it.
. If he has been turned aside from his
objective, he analyzes the experience and
profits thereby.

. His life is what he wishes it to be, and
he always expected it to be exactly that.
. As he successively pictures success
within his mind and then attains it, he lets
his deeds, not his words, display his
success to others.
. He is well-liked by a great many
different kinds of people; people of all races
and creeds.
. He is a living example of what a man
may be in the United States of America
when he takes possession of his own mind
and is willing to live and let live.
. He is no more disturbed by panics and
business depressions than he is by matters
which affect only himself.
. He finds it easy to win the full and
hearty cooperation of others.

. He is fair to his adversaries, but he is
practically

unbeatable

because

he

possesses a power unknown to most men.
. He is fortified against disappointment
because he knows that anything may
happen with or without an obvious cause.
. He does his best at all times, and never
feels

the

need

to

apologize

when

circumstances tum against him.
How many items did you check? If you
have three-quarters of these virtues, you
probably are aware that you are "your own
person," living your own life, knowing your
own mind, being yourself without fear or
self-consciousness.
In reading through the list you can see how
wide a field it encompasses. Anyone of
those topics could be expanded into a

considerable discourse, and many other
constructive points of view are inherent in
the ones mentioned. If now you will leaf
back through the book, and glance over the
Table of Contents, you will see how many
other

areas

of

mind-conception

and

physical realization are related to this list.
This is as it should be. We are speaking of
a universal way of life.
You can help others without interfering
with

their

own

possession

of

themselves. I have given a number of
instances of how I have been aided by and
how I have aided others. Please note that
really

effective

aid

comes

not

from

"bossing" another person but from helping
that person find and use qualities or
success which are waiting to be used. One
cannot carry others along the highway of

success; but one may point the way by
helping others to help themselves.
A child can be beaten into a course of
conduct acceptable to his parents –
sometimes – but that child has learned
nothing. I well remember the thrashings my
father gave me because I resisted sitting in
church for endless hours while five or six
"hardshell Baptists" did their best to make
the congregation partake of the miseries of
Hell.
One Sunday morning my father followed
me down to the river where I had organized
my fishing equipment. He broke it up
completely and gave me a whipping that
would have brought the Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals down
upon him if he had whipped one of his
horses that way.

My

wonderful

stepmother

heard

my

screams and came running to my aid. She
pulled my father away from me and said "If
you ever strike this child again, I will leave
you forever.
Can't you let him live his own life?"
Much as I remember the beatings, I better
remember the one sentence which settled
into my young mind like a glorious light. My
father never whipped me again, and I
believe I gave him no reason to whip me.
Yet I did live my own life, perhaps
compromising here and there as a child
must, yet always winning more and more
freedom to be myself because my mind
conceived so firmly that to be myself was
what I wanted. Let me add that my
stepmother's influence at length made a
fine person out of my father. A child also

can be so mercilessly preached at,
endlessly corrected and admonished "for
his own good" that soon no selfrespecting
remains. The child becomes an adult who
forever will lean upon others.
Never

interfere

with

anyone

else's

possession of himself. Do not preach
unless you are a professional preacher. Do
not insistently and remorselessly teach
unless you are a professional teacher; and
even then, teaching should be limited to the
teaching of definite skills and background
knowledge.
Do not expect any other person to meet
your definition of "perfect." Do not expect
anything to appear perfect to you, and bear
in mind that imperfections give variety to
the world. In saying this I am reminded of a
man who said that if there is a Heaven, he

did not wish to go to Heaven when he died.
Interested, I asked him to explain.
"Well," he said, "I don't see any enjoyment
in living where everything is perfect."
I do not think it is an accident that this man
is one of the best-known businessmen in
America, and that he owns a large measure
of peace of mind. Also, I have never heard
of his trying to reform anybody. He says, as
I too wish to say, that it is perfectly possible
to get along with people as they are, with
their faults – and with all their virtues.
One good way to maintain possession of
your own mind and to allow others to
possess their own minds is to keep certain
views to yourself. You are not required to
go through life explaining yourself, and
often it is a mistake to do so. This applies

particularly to controversial subjects such
as religion and politics. Exposing your
views in these matters is almost bound to
cause unnecessary conflict.
No one knows how I stand on either religion
or politics. No one, therefore, can get me
riled or rile themselves in regard to my
standpoint.
Many busybodies have tried to pry into my
mind to see what they will discover in those
areas. Once a woman wrote to me "How
come I see no mention of Jesus in any of
your writings?"
To which I replied "Madam, if you will read
any of my books in the spirit in which I wrote
them, you will find Jesus on every page –
between the lines, however, not in the
words that are printed."

Self-control gives you strength. To be
yourself, practice self-control. Few people
have difficulty in controlling their physical
actions, but they may never stop to realize
that physical actions begin in the mind. A
man whose mind conceives only a small,
frightened view of life will act just like a man
whose mind conceives only a small,
frightened view of life.
A person who has self-control has strength
– I repeat, strength – denied to many
another.
Above all, he has the strength to see
situations clearly, judge them for what they
really are, greatly increase the percentage
of life-situations he swings toward his own
good and the good of others.

Please look back at the list of forty-three
items earlier in this chapter. Number 
says that a person who is his own master
never seeks revenge on anyone. Let us
take this as a very good example. Revenge
can be spuriously sweet, but it is a sweet
poison to the personality and no more will
merge with peace of mind than oil will
merge with water.
Who is in a better position to revenge
himself on a person who has hurt him, but
seeks an appointment to public office, than
the President of the United States? Very
well, let us look at one of our Presidents –
first some five years before he attained that
high office.
When I mention he was then a lawyer in
Springfield, Illinois, you will have no trouble
in identifying Abraham Lincoln. One of our

earliest big industrial companies was in
legal difficulty, and Lincoln was appointed
by the court to work with two other lawyers
on the case.
But these two lawyers were famous big-city
men. They snubbed the gawky country
lawyer. When he painstakingly prepared
papers on the case, they would not even
read them.
Worse yet, they would not even sit at the
same table with him. This was a public
humiliation, and it must have hurt bitterly.
Five years passed. The lean, sad-faced
man was elected President. Soon it was
time for him to choose his cabinet,
including a Secretary of War. One man
stood out as the best choice for this
ominously important post – Edward M.

Stanton. And Lincoln remembered Stanton
as one of the lawyers who had treated him
so badly in his Springfield days.
Yet he appointed Stanton his Secretary of
War. Is there any question that Lincoln was
his own master – for his own good, for the
good of all?
Many men date their discovery of selfcontrol from one dramatic experience. I
know that is so in my case. I have
mentioned that I learned peace of mind the
hard way, by trial and error – and this
experience is a good example.
I had an office in an old building. One day
the janitor and I had a misunderstanding.
After that the janitor decided to show his
contempt of me. Many times when I stayed
late at work, he switched off all the lights in

the building and left me in the dark. I was
then still capable of boiling with suppressed
rage, and this I did increasingly.
One Sunday I entered my office to prepare
an address I had to deliver the following
evening. No sooner had I seated myself at
my desk than the lights went out.
I leaped up and ran recklessly to the
basement. There I found the janitor stoking
the furnace and whistling merrily. All my
pent-up wrath burst loose, and I damned
him with adjectives that were hotter than
the furnace.
When I ran out of words he straightened
up, grinned and remarked "Why, you're a
little excited today, ain't you?"
He had maintained his poise. I, a student of
advanced psychology, an exponent of the

philosophy of the Golden Rule, a student of
the works of Shakespeare, Emerson,
Socrates and the Bible – I stood there
before a man who was scarcely literate and
knew he was the better man.
I went back slowly to my office. I sat and
thought, and after a while I knew I must
apologize to that man. No, I said, I could
not, and I would not. Yet in time I rose,
knowing that I must find peace with him and
peace in my own heart.
When I got to the basement, the janitor had
gone into his little apartment. I tapped
gently at his door. He opened it, and in a
calm, kindly voice asked me what I wanted.
I said I wished to apologize for the wrong I
had done him in cursing him.

His simple smile spread all over his face.
"Nobody heard you outside these four
walls," he said. "I ain't goin' to tell about it
and I reckon you ain't goin' to tell about it,
so let's forget the whole thing."
We shook hands. There was no more
friction between us and no more spite work.
And something within my mind took hold of
itself. I resolved that never again would I
lose my self-control; never again would I
lose sight of the self which existed as a
mind-conception and which henceforth
never would falter.
Once I had made that resolution, my pen
began to take on greater power. My spoken
words were received with full attention. I
began to make friends with ease, and I was
far better able to show others how to find

themselves and be themselves and use
self-knowledge to win a fortune.
Did I make a perfect change? Not quite. I
had been aware for some time of a series
of bitter attacks against me which came
from a certain journalist. For four or five
years I ignored these attacks, but they
became so outrageous that I decided to lay
aside my policy of peace and hit back. I sat
at my typewriter and began to write. I wrote
at length and filled pages with bitter
invective. The more I wrote, the more angry
I became. At length I wrote my last line –
and then a strange feeling came over me.
It was not a feeling of rage against the man
who had tried to discredit me, but a feeling
of sympathy and forgiveness. I never
mailed that letter.

What had happened? As I see it, my
furiously tapping fingers had transferred
my repressed emotions of hatred and
resentment onto paper, and I was rid of
those

emotions.

In

a

way

I

had

psychoanalyzed myself and had cleaned
the

dark

sub-basement

of

my

subconscious mind.
The experience gave me two benefits. The
first and greatest was the realization that,
any time rage took hold of me, I could "write
it out of my system." It is a great method,
and you might try it. Some get the same
effect with a long, fast walk; others indulge
in violent athletic activity and then feel their
self-control return. Others take out their
bad temper on their wives but of course this
is harmful to both parties.

My second benefit came from filing away
some of my writings in anger and looking at
them years later, when I had gained greater
understanding. Try this too, and you will
find it a very interesting process, for as you
know yourself you will increasingly know a
better self. I am glad to say I have not
needed any such release of rage for a good
many years, for rage no longer can evade
my Guardian Princes.
Your mind is your only master. You had
nothing to do with your coming into this
world. You may have little or nothing to do
with your leaving it. But you have almost
everything to do with your life while you
possess that life. You can be the master of
your fate, the captain of your soul by the
simple process of taking possession of
your own mind and using it to guide your

own life without meddling in the lives of
others.
Notice the connection between mastering
yourself and not attempting to master
others. A major reason for unhappiness is
the tendency to meddle with the lives of
others while we take too little time in trying
to perfect our own.
Nobody else can do the job of taking
possession of your mind, nor should you
permit anyone else to try. Your mind is your
master; yet your mind can be such a kindly
master that it responds to your needs and
desires and finds ways to make them come
true when they are definite. All other
creatures on earth are bound throughout
their lives by a fixed pattern of instinct from
which they cannot escape. YOU are bound

only by the pattern you set up in your own
mind. YOU are limited by nothing else.
Be patient in your search for peace of
mind. If peace of mind were a quality which
could be attained in one easy lesson, I
would be glad to show the way in a short
letter rather than by writing a book. This
book, which approaches the subjects of
riches and peace of mind from so many
angles, is built on a grand plan which may
be compared to the farmer's plan in
ploughing his fields, sowing his seeds,
tending his crop and waiting for his harvest.
Remember the farmer and be confident
and patient. And, like the farmer, use
thought and action in ways which have
proved their power to bring a desired result.
If you meet with adversity, see it as a
valuable lesson. During the days of my

youth I used to flinch from adversity. Now,
when I see it coming my way, I say "Hello,
little fellow! I do not know what lesson you
have come to teach me, but whatever it is I
shall learn it well, so you will not have to
return a second time."
After I had learned to live my own life, I
observed that adversities became fewer
and fewer, weaker and weaker, until at long
last they ceased to appear.
Living your own life may take some
"house cleaning." By the time we reach
adulthood, most of us have acquired a
good deal of clutter in our lives. As you
begin to know yourself and know the image
of the life you want to build, you will
recognize this clutter. Throw it out!

You might begin by discarding some of
those acquaintances who waste your time,
interfere with your efforts and try to manage
you. Clear them out! You need not turn
them into enemies, but when you want to
be yourself you will find ways to avoid any
person who

tries

to

deny

you

the

inalienable right of being yourself.
There is also the self-made clutter which
results from not having a clear idea of how
you wish to use each day. Make up a time
budget. Allot your time in favor of the
"musts" which apply to anyone who wants
to live his own life profitably and pleasantly.
Eight hours a day is a good allotment for
sleep and for rest.
Eight hours a day is a good allotment for
work at your business or profession; but as

your pattern of life-success grows stronger,
probably your hours of work will grow less.
The remaining eight hours are particularly
precious. You should divide them into
various periods, each of which will be
devoted to something you wish to do, not
something you have to do. What do you
wish to do? Stop now and think. Make a list,
such as
•

Play

•

Social life

•

Reading

•

Writing

•

Playing a musical instrument

•

Extending your knowledge in some

field that has nothing to do with your
making a living Tending your garden

•

Building gadgets in your home

workshop
•

Hiking

•

Boating

•

"Just sitting" and watching the clouds

or the stars
I repeat, those remaining eight hours are
particularly precious. They are YOUR
FREE TIME in which you may live your own
life precisely as you wish to live it. You may
find this takes some courage. You may
have acquired an exaggerated sense of
duty

toward

others

(often

a

pretty

description for plain meddling). You may
too well remember being told in childhood
such nonsense as "the devil finds work for
idle hands." But then, it takes courage to be
oneself and avoid the pressures to be like

other people and let them live your life for
you.
In the earlier stages of winning success,
you may very logically give over some of
that time to get a business education, or in
other ways to improve your earning status.
But do not let a day go by without taking
some time for yourself – some time you
spend in pure pleasure, as you see it. This
is part of being yourself. It helps you always
to keep in touch with yourself, so to speak.
With increasing success, increase your
hours of pure enjoyment; do not allow
those hours to be eaten away by business
or by anything else.
Some time ago a close friend came to visit
me. He found me dressed in my shorts,
lying on the grass in the back yard and
playing ball with my dogs.

"What a picture," he exclaimed. "I guess
you wouldn't want your public to see you as
you are now."
"I wouldn't mind it a bit," I replied. "I'd like
people to know I practice what I preach.
Here I am, doing precisely what I wish to do
at this moment. Can anyone be better off
than in doing what he wishes to do?"
If any man needed simple freedom, my
friend did. He spent a good deal more than
eight hours a day as the operating
executive of a large financial house, and
often worked far into the night. With millions
of dollars, he had no peace of mind and his
health had begun to suffer.
He telephoned me the next day. "Guess
what I've been doing for the past hour!"

"I can't imagine, but I'd certainly like to
know."
He laughed gaily. "Playing with my dog,
and it's wonderful!" A moment of silence;
then he said "Believe me, I'm going to play
and live hereafter!"
I set down the key thoughts of this chapter
many years ago. Woodrow Wilson read
what I had written and said "It inspired
thoughts which were not of this world."
On another occasion I received President
Wilson just as I had received my old friend,
in my shorts while romping with my dogs.
He was grateful. That harassed man
shared, if only for a few minutes, the
blessedness of having time to be one's
relaxed self.

When you see yourself as your own master
and carry the vision into action, you use the
Supreme Secret.
Checking on  
The basic drives that make a man
The "nuts and bolts" of earning money are
important, but your basic drives are what
build the nuts and bolts into a mighty edifice
of good fortune. In a clothing store, in a
restaurant, wherever you may go, exercise
the art of being yourself. Beware of
imitating anyone at any time in your career,
for in doing so you may suppress talents
which are uniquely yours and can build
your fortune.
Let nobody bribe you away from being
yourself

Because you are going to make money,
you are likely to receive offers which
amount to tying yourself to someone else's
affairs instead of your own. This may work
out well, but for some it amounts to selling
one's peace of mind and sense of
individuality. Check the list of forty-three
items which help you see yourself as you
are and as you can be – a person truly in
charge of his own mind and invincible in his
self-possession. Every human being needs
to live his own life.
You help others not by interfering with them
but by helping them find and use their own
qualities of success. It is important to give
a child as much freedom as possible. Do
not preach unless you are a professional
preacher, nor teach too heavily. Accept
people's faults as well as their virtues, for

even their faults make the world more
varied and interesting.
Self-control gives you strength
When you keep most of your views to
yourself, you strengthen your sense of selfpossession and also avoid unnecessary
friction with others. Self-control helps you
control many life situations which otherwise
might not turn out in your favor. It helps you
act for your own good and the good of
others

despite

your

anger

or

other

emotions.
Your mind is your only master
Your mind first must conceive anything you
accomplish, but your mind is a kindly
master and will find ways to win what you
sincerely and consistently desire. Other
creatures are bound by a fixed pattern of

instinct, but you are bound only by the
pattern you set up in your own mind. Be
patient in your search for peace of mind.
Above all, learn the great lesson that every
day should contain a good amount of time
in which you enjoy your own personal
pleasure.

  The Master Mind Group – A
Power Beyond Science
The great achievements of your life – first
built as mind-concepts, then made real –
are not limited to the power of your own
mind. A myriad of other minds can tune in
upon yours and give you their thoughts
through ethereal vibration. Forming a
Master Mind group is a good way to begin
the process of tuning in, and when you form
your group you will know you are using a
technique which has mightily proved its
benefit among many well-known men. All
great achievements are the result of a
multiplicity of minds working together
harmoniously.
WAS Henry Ford ignorant? Rather than
attempt to form your answer, which must
come from within yourself, I shall tell you of

an experience the founder of Ford Motor
Company

had

in

a

courtroom.

The

experience really included everybody in
that courtroom and a good many outside
the courtroom as well.
As we know, Mr. Ford had little formal
schooling. Perhaps because of this fact,
the Chicago Tribune, which took exception
to some of his views on war, called him an
ignoramus. Mr. Ford brought suit, charging
the newspaper with libel.
When the attorneys for the Tribune had Mr.
Ford on the witness stand, they crossexamined him in an attempt to prove their
statement was true.
One question they asked was "How many
soldiers did the British send over to subdue
the rebellion in the colonies in ?"

With a dry grin, Ford replied "I don't know
just how many, but I have heard it was a lot
more than ever went back."
There was laughter from the court, the jury,
the

spectators,

and

even

from

the

frustrated lawyer who had asked the
question.
Ford kept calm through an hour or more of
similar questioning on "schoolbook" topics.
At length, in reply to a question which was
particularly

obnoxious

to

him,

the

industrialist let off some steam. He
observed that he had a row of electric
push-buttons hanging over his desk, and
that when he wanted a question answered,
he placed his finger on the right button and
called in the right man to answer that
question. He wanted to know why he
should burden his mind with a lot of useless

details when he had able men around him
who could supply him with all the
information he needed.
This trial occurred many years ago and I
dare say that only a minority of my readers
recall how it came out. If you do not know,
exercise your own power to develop
information by going to the library and
finding out. I will say, however, that Mr.
Ford's remarks resounded through that
silenced courtroom, through the nation and
around the world. Surely Ford's friend
Thomas Edison appreciated them, for he
was another who had surrounded himself
with able men through whom he vastly
extended his own abilities and his own
mind-power, school education or no.
Thomas Paine, whose keen mind helped
both in drawing up the Declaration of

Independence

and

in

persuading

its

signers to translate their concept into
reality, spoke in memorable terms of the
great storehouse of knowledge which waits
to be transferred to our own storehouse. I
quote him in part
Any person, who has made observations
on the ... human mind, by observing his
own, cannot but have observed that there
are two classes of what are called
Thoughts those that we produce in
ourselves by reflection and the act of
thinking, and those that bolt into the mind
of their own accord. I have always made it
a rule to treat these voluntary visitors with
civility ... and it is from them that I have
acquired almost all the knowledge that I
have. As to the learning that any person
gains from school education, it serves only

like a small capital, to put him in the way of
beginning learning for himself afterwards.
Every person of learning is finally his own
teacher.
Whence come the thoughts which do not
originate within our own minds, out of our
own experience? Often it is apparent that
such thoughts are suggested by other
persons in words or in writing, and later
they

"play

back"

from

within

our

subconscious memories; or they may be a
completely conscious process, as when we
sit in conference with another.
All of us, however, receive thoughts which
are silently broadcast by other minds and
received by our own. This too is a "planted"
idea we touched upon previously and now
shall examine in more detail.

What is the Master Mind? I visualize the
Master Mind as a formless, boundless
reservoir of thought-vibration. Not all of it
can be available to any one person at any
one time. When you are in harmony with
another person or with a number of other
people, however, the attunement of mind to
mind results in a "tuning in" of incalculable
value. A man who has a corps of assistants
with whom he maintains amiable relations
has at his disposal far more than the
knowledge his assistants may give him by
obvious means. Their minds constantly
feed his through mental broadcast power
and receive information from his mind as
well. The same is true when friends or
business associates form a Master Mind
group at which they discuss various topics
or problems. Their several minds focused

on the topic obviously add great power to
the mind most occupied with it; but also an
exchange of broadcast thoughts is effected
right then, and also later, when the persons
involved may be far apart. This is not
obvious as is speech or writing, but its
power goes beyond anything science can
completely explain.
I have been greatly interested in observing
how the science of this atomic age gives
"faith and credit" in this direction to the
science of fifty years ago. At that time we
could list eighty-odd forms of physical
matter (we list many more now) and we
knew that matter is made of incredibly tiny
particles with space between. We had
begun to know there is so much space
within matter that, in a sense, nothing is
"solid." You and I, the desk at which I write,

my typewriter, this dot (.) are made of
atoms; the atom in tum contains electrons
which either revolve in orbits or vibrate
rapidly to and fro. Other particles such as
neutrons are now postulated, but the
principle remains the same. Whether you
observe the largest star that glitters in the
sky or the smallest grain of sand among
billions on a beach, it is a collection of
particles, space and electric charges.
Fifty years ago we had begun to have some
proof that even the most minute particles
are not "things" but bundles of vibrations.
We knew, too, that various forms of energy
proceed through air and space in their
characteristic forms because of their
varying frequency of vibration. Thus,
vibrations beginning at about  per
second and going up to about , per

second are perceptible to the human ear as
sound. Above that we no longer hear
vibrations;

but

at

around

,,

vibrations per second that form of energy
called heat begins and we can feel it with
another of our senses.
Higher up the scale of vibration comes
light, often combined with heat, and our
eyes perceive this. The lowest lightvibrations begin with deep red, the highest
are violet, with all other colors in between.
Above the vibrations of violet – some
,, per second – lie ultraviolet and
other vibrations invisible to the eye but
detectable by instruments.
Still higher up the scale – we cannot yet say
how high – may lie the vibrations of
thought, and these are the invisible,

inaudible vibrations which flash from mind
to mind.
Dr. Alexander Graham Bell, whose name
we justly associate with the telephone, was
an authority on vibration. He noted that we
have no ordinary sense that can appreciate
the effect of any vibration between heat
and light. He said "... there must be a great
deal to be learned about the effect of those
vibrations in the great gap where the
ordinary human senses are unable to hear,
see or feel the movement. The power to
send

wireless

messages

by

ether

vibrations lies in that gap, but the gap is so
great that it seems there must be much
more. ... It seems to me that in this gap lie
the vibrations which we have assumed to
be given off by our brains and nerve cells
when we think. But then, again, they may

be higher up, in the scale beyond the
vibrations that produce the ultraviolet rays
[my own theory].
"It would be possible to cite many reasons
why thought and vital force may be
regarded as of the same nature as
electricity.... We may assume that the brain
cells act as a battery and that the current
produced flows along the nerves. But does
it end there? Does it not pass out of the
body in waves which flow around the world
unperceived by our senses, just as the
wireless waves passed unperceived before
Hertz

and

others

discovered

their

existence?"
Field theory and thought-transference.
Einstein showed mathematically that vast
fields of force pervade the universe. A field
of force comes out of every wire that carries

current or we would have no electric
motors, no radio or television and would
lack quite a few other conveniences. Why
should not a field of force emanate from the
electricity which constantly passes to and
fro along the conducting nerves and cells
of the body? Why should they not go
around the world, into space, on forever?
Now our world is both threatened and
uplifted by the physical realization of
Einstein's great mind-concept of nearly
sixty years ago E=mc. This formula
governs the conversion of mass into
energy, and accounts for the enormous
energy put to use in atomic power plants
and the atomic bomb. In using atomic
power we prove once and for all, for
everyone to see, that mass is energy.

Since energy is vibration, everything
undoubtedly is vibration.
You and I now know we are vibration –
beyond the shadow of a doubt. Tune your
radio to the known vibration-rate of any
radio station as indicated on the tuning dial,
and you sensitize your radio to that
particular vibration; the radio then changes
it into vibrations you can hear. Is there
anything strange about a natural "tuning" to
the

omnipresent

thought-vibrations

of

another mind which already has shown its
empathy with your own mind? It is no more
strange than radio. Radio's laws at length
were discovered. So shall the laws of
thought-broadcast and reception someday
be discovered, and the natural apparatus
we now use but dimly shall be at
everyone's command.

How to form and use your own Master
Mind group. You understand now that
whenever two or more minds are blended
in a spirit of perfect harmony, for the pursuit
of a definite purpose, there is born of that
alliance a power which is greater than that
of all the individual minds combined.
This is the Master Mind principle. It does
not interfere with your possession of
yourself. In fact, one who is himself in all
ways is all the more able to accept ideas
from the minds of others peacefully and
usefully, since he is in no danger of being
overwhelmed. The Science of Personal
Achievement was born out of a Master
Mind alliance, my allies having been those
five hundred and more successful men
whom I interviewed and worked with in the
course of many years.

A person who has peace of mind always
gives as well as receives. As you apply the
Master Mind principle, you not only share
your knowledge with others but also place
yourself in a position to receive generously
from others – and that which you receive
can multiply your power to grow rich far
beyond your present conception.
Here, then, are the steps to take in order to
avail yourself of the boundless benefits of
the Master Mind principle
. Your Master Mind round table. Begin by
inviting two or three people whom you
know well to join you in your undertaking.
Be sure that these people are in harmony
with you and with one another. Explain that
the major purpose of the alliance is mutual
growth mentally and spiritually, while you

certainly will accept the material benefits
which naturally attend such development.
. You are not a debating society. Make it
clear

from

the

beginning

that

such

controversial matters as politics, religion
and similarly touchy topics have no place in
your group meetings. Your aim is to aid one
another with knowledge based on the
experience each member has gained from
life.
.

Your

discussion

is

confidential.

Discussion and cooperation must stay
within the group. Knowing this, all will be
encouraged to speak freely.
. The group will be allowed to grow. From
time to time, the group may be enlarged by
additional members. It should not be
allowed to grow so large as to become

unwieldy. Any new member must be
subject to a unanimous vote of acceptance.
. Provide for a trial election. With the
exception of the original members of the
Master Mind group, members may be
elected for one month or for some other
convenient period. You should be perfectly
frank about the necessity of making sure
that any new member is in harmony with
the others, and that if you ask him to leave
the group it is no reflection upon his
personal worth.
. Agree on general principles of lifesuccess. Bear in mind that if anyone of your
round-table members does not believe, for
instance, that he should give completely of
his knowledge and experience, he will
create disharmony and you may get
nowhere. I suggest that you all agree on

the principles set forth in this book in the
lists covering the qualities of peace of mind
(Foreword) and self-possession (
Nine); also sit down together with the
summing-up list at the end of the book.
. Rotate your chairmen and your "board of
directors". Each person should serve in
tum as the chairman. He should see that all
members take part in the discussion; that
questions are asked freely, and personal
experiences freely described. He should
ask each speaker to stand as he speaks, to
help him develop poise while speaking "on
his feet." He should enforce any time limit
agreed upon, so as to prevent the more
verbose members from consuming more
than their share of the time. Rotation of the
chairmen will automatically result in the
rotation of members of the "board" who

listen to the speaker, who thus wins a
variety of minds to serve him.
. When a group consists of fellowworkers. When a Master Mind group
consists of the employees of a single
business, it should contain members of
management as well as members of the
rank-and-file. This plan has been followed
with a great development of friendly
cooperation, benefit to the business as well
as benefit to the individuals concerned.
. Adopt a major purpose. In addition to the
individual purposes and problems which
will be aired, the group as a whole should
adopt some major purpose or project, to be
carried on jointly by all its members for the
benefit of people who are not in the group.
One such project was that of conducting a
Personal Problem Clinic once a week, at

which the public was invited to bring in
personal problems for consideration by the
group, sitting as a Personal Problem Court.
When a project is completed, another
should be chosen.
Further instructions on your Master
Mind alliance. Since part of this book's
purpose is to spare you from learning by
trial and error, I shall set down some
lessons already learned that way – by
myself and others.
I suggest that you do not reveal the private
purposes of your Master Mind alliance to
those outside the group. Remember the
many who are wedded to failure and who
channel their efforts – not toward success
– but toward trying to tear down others.
Such persons will scoff at the Master Mind
principle. Their scoffing need not annoy

you, but it may; and at any rate, you need
nobody's opinion but your own so far as
forming your group is concerned.
When you sit down with your Master Mind
group, make sure you leave all negative
points of view behind. Your meetings
should be your greatest signal to find and
hold a positive mental attitude. Moreover,
as leader of your Master Mind group it is
your duty to show your own enthusiasm
and allow others to share this valuable
emotion. (Don't worry about the mechanics
of sharing your enthusiasm, for there is no
other emotion that is so "catching"!).
Take care to see that every member of the
group receives something out of every
meeting. Enthusiasm and cooperation will
grow in proportion to the rewards every
man bears away with him.

A Master Mind group is not a place in which
to bring competitors together. Nobody in
the group should have reason to feel
antagonistic toward any other member, nor
have any motive for keeping secrets from
him. Remember that confidence is the
basis of all harmonious relationships. Form
your group out of people in whom you have
confidence;

make

sure

they

have

confidence in you.
Millions of people need a Personal
Problem Clinic. I purposefully repeat that
every Master Mind should have a group
purpose which benefits those outside the
group. This principle is so important that I
shall enlarge upon the idea of the Personal
Problem Clinic, surely one of the best
public services any group can perform.

Let us look at a number of typical
applications.
If I were a life insurance agent, I would
conduct such a clinic twice weekly, if
possible. The modem life insurance man is
looked upon as a counselor in several
fields

of

family

concern,

budget

for

example. While giving of your time and
telling your own life-experience and that of
others, you may well form an indelible
impression upon men and women who
need life insurance.
If I were a clergyman, I would conduct a
Personal Problem Clinic going far beyond
the members of my own congregation. I
would have sitting with me, as Board of
Counselors, the ablest members of my
church, representing a wide variety of
businesses and professions. I would

expect no direct reward but would be
gratified if my services helped to fill the
pews of my church every Sunday.
If I were a schoolteacher, I would recognize
that parents who are led to a harmonious
solution of their problems are better
parents, better able to help their children. I
would conduct a clinic in the hopes that
both generations would benefit and that the
benefit would be reflected in the ability of
my pupils to retain what I teach and grow
into better citizens.
If I were a physician, dentist, osteopath,
chiropractor or naturopath, I would conduct
a clinic for the benefit of my patients and I
would invite them to bring their friends and
neighbors with them. Knowing that much
illness originates in the mind, I would take
this opportunity to heal where I could and

in other cases to speed the processes of
healing.
If I were the head of a family that included
growing children, I would conduct a
Personal Problem Clinic for each member
of the family. I might very well invite my
neighbors to join.
I have pointed out some of the benefits
which may accrue to you from running a
Personal Problem Clinic. You may see no
benefit; but rest assured that any benefit
you send out into the world will come back
to you in some way, at some time, perhaps
a thousand times multiplied.
The late Mahatma Gandhi made himself
one of the greatest benefactors of all time
by the simple process of serving his
countrymen without limit and without

thought of financial reward. He was
probably in the hearts of more men than
any other man who ever lived. He drew
several hundred million of his Indian
countrymen to him of their own free will,
and his reward the independence of his
nation – was a reward greater than most of
us ever dream of achieving.
Your Master Mind group of necessity will be
a small group. Yet when you extend it out
into the world through a Personal Problem
Clinic – through adopting the sponsorship
of a Boys' Club or some other welfare
agency – or whatever other group project
you

may

choose,

your

mind

will

automatically feel the effect of many other
minds in harmony with your purpose. Here
are illimitable riches!

The Master Mind principle in politics. In
speaking with some men who hold political
office, I have been saddened momentarily
by what they call their "hard-headed"
attitude. Once they are voted into power,
they tend to wield that power like a club,
arbitrarily swinging their influence with little
regard to those who must obey the rules
they set. This is not so with the truly great
men; but unfortunately, a good many smallminded men achieve public office.
If I were the mayor of a town or city, I would
set up a People's Personal Problem Clinic
in the City Hall. The counsellors in the
Clinic would be the keenest minds in the
city lawyers, doctors, teachers, bankers,
builders – a cross-section of such a variety
of human talent that any citizen could rely
upon finding an understanding ear.

I would hold clinic sessions at some stated
hour at least once a week. As the clinic
attracted more and more people, I might
find it advisable to organize it into
subgroups. I certainly would arrange for
private

counsel

to

be

available

in

emergencies between meetings, and to
follow up on particular cases if need be.
My reward? I believe that any mayor who
did this would maintain himself in office for
as long as he wished. Yet this is only a
secondary reward. The real reward would
lie in knowing that I have lifted government
to a new, high plane of individuality and
humanity.
Your mind is strengthened by peace and
harmony. Do you expect your life to bring
you only harmony and peace? Life indeed
would be dull if it did not have its times of

conflict, of problems to be solved. We grow
as we overcome difficulties. If the solving of
problems were not so important a part of
the learning process, we would learn few of
the lessons of life.
When peace and harmony remain as the
veritable foundation stones of thought and
emotion, however, problems are solved
with a strength which truly "passeth
understanding."
Even temporary peace is a great sustaining
force. Doctors often recommend a change
of climate for certain types of patients. The
climate itself may or may not have
something to do with the healing process;
more important is the change of scene.
New faces, new landscapes bring the mind
away from its accustomed squirrel cage of
worries. "Miracle" cures have been effected

when a patient walked out peacefully
among the trees and the hills.
As

you

become

better

and

better

acquainted with your own mind, you will
find it possible to hold harmony within your
mind no matter what goes on around you.
Meanwhile, try consciously at some time of
the day to attune your mind to peace, not
conflict – rest, not striving.
After a while, as you sit or walk or lie quietly
alone, you may feel as though harmony is
flowing into your mind from sources
outside. Indeed this is true, for it is possible
for any harmonious mind to tune in to yours
when you have made your mind receptive.
The importance of harmony in your home.
Now you can see that when I have spoken
of harmony in your home, I have spoken of

more than a merely pleasant situation.
Harmony in the home is a pervasive force
which flows continually in and out of the
mind-circuits and conditions the mind to
keep

itself

in

peace

and

continued

harmony.
We live in a home where harmony and
affection

are

the

dominating

spirits.

Everything we do in our home gives us
pleasure, including our work, which is a
work of love.
Now and again, my wife and I take a long
walk, or perhaps a drive into the country.
We return refreshed with thoughts of new
faces,

new

scenes,

perhaps

new

experiences – and glad to return to a home
that is good to come back to.

Find your own way to get rid of worry –
but keep it simple. In II Kings, 
Five, you may read the story of Naaman,
captain of the host of the King of Syria. This
rich and powerful man was afflicted with
leprosy. He called upon the prophet Elisha
to cure him, expecting Elisha to come up
with some complicated and mysterious
rigmarole. But Elisha merely said "Go and
wash in Jordan seven times and thy flesh
shall come again to thee, and thou shalt be
clean."
Perhaps this story is a parable, showing us
that there generally is a simple way out of
our troubles. I do not deny the existence of
very serious troubles; but I have noticed
that the great majority of troubles are minor
annoyances which lead to a pattern of
annoyance and worry. Feed your mind on

little worries and it will develop quite an
appetite for big worries.
The greatest buttress of worry is – sitting
around and thinking about your worry. This
adds

strength

to

the

worry,

which

thereupon sends stronger and stronger
roots into the mind which nourishes it.
The greatest destroyer and uprooter of
worry is – transmuting the worry-reaction
into some sort of constructive activity. By
going into action, make your mind focus on
that action. By using your muscles,
however mildly, you give a rest to your
mind.
I have a friend who has a novel way of
dealing with worries. He goes out into his
garden and hoes vigorously until he has
worked up a good perspiration.

Others, perhaps not so vigorous, may
cancel worry by attending to some bit of
craftsmanship or carpentry. And then, of
course, there is the excellent procedure of
turning your mind toward helping someone
else solve his problem, a method available
even to the bedridden.
But nothing complicated! In this book we
talk of many things, and you would do well
to come back to this section now and then
to refresh yourself with the idea that peace
of mind is essentially a simple state of
being. It is often remarked that some
successful, highly placed men are really
"quite simple fellows" when you get to know
them. Indeed they are – no matter of how
high an order may be their intelligence. An
efficient mind attains a basic simplicity
upon which all else is built.

I am reminded of a man who was greatly
benefited by participating in a Master Mind
alliance. He said that his greatest benefit
came from being helped to see his
problems through others' eyes and thus to
see, at last, how simple his problems were.
He said he had been in the habit of
multiplying his problems by each other and
looking at the sum, which was tremendous.
When he took his problems one by one,
they were quickly solved, and his mind
began clicking as it never had before.
The Supreme Secret is as inherent in this
chapter as a book is inherent in the mind
that conceives its plan.
Checking on  
Your mind can reach beyond itself

Men such as Henry Ford and Thomas
Edison were expert in using others as
sources of information and skills which
multiplied their own talents. We also
receive ideas from other minds without the
mediation of speech. "Every man of
learning is his own teacher," and as he
learns from life, he also learns from
thoughts which "come from nowhere," it
seems, but really are transmitted from
other minds to his own.
The Master Mind a boundless reservoir
Fifty years ago, scientists postulated the
vibration theory of matter which since has
been well proved by the discovery of
atomic power. All energy proceeds in
varying frequencies of vibration. The
vibration of thought must lie somewhere in
this spectrum of vibration. When you tune

in your radio you sensitize it to receive the
signals of a particular broadcasting station.
Just so does your mind sensitize itself to
other minds and receive thoughts from
them.
You can form your own Master Mind group
Make your group out of people you know
well. Make it clear you are not to discuss
controversial topics. Keep the discussion
confidential. Require unanimous consent
before you admit a new member and
provide for a trial election. Agree on
general principles of life success. Rotate
your chairmen and your "board." let your
group contain both management and rankand-file members. A Personal Problem
Clinic has proved to be a favorite purpose.
It can be headed by an insurance man, a
clergyman, a physician or anyone else. The

mayor of a town can do great things for his
city if he sets up a Clinic and provides for
following through on any problems brought
to the attention of the Clinic Staff.
Your mind is strengthened by peace and
harmony
Life would be dull without some problems
and conflicts, but peace and harmony deep
within the mind help many problems to
solve themselves. Some change is good
for everyone. To avoid worry, take physical
action to focus the mind on other things; or
help someone else solve his problems.
Some of us tend to multiply our problems
by each other, but a Master Mind group
helps you solve your problems one by one.

  Win Mighty Aid from the
Eternal Law of Compensation
The Law of Compensation can work for you
or against you depending upon the way you
guide it. It may take many years for
punishment to follow transgression or for
reward

to

follow

virtue.

but

the

compensation always will find you out.
Nature makes sure that any excess is
followed by a leveling. Fear gives way to
the Law of Compensation, and envy and
malice also disappear from life when one
understands

how

the

Law

of

Compensation can lead anyone to great
success – because anyone can control the
way it works for him.
DROP in at any public library, even a very
small one, and ask the librarian for Ralph
Waldo Emerson's essay on Compensation.

She will almost certainly be able to direct
you to the exact shelf where Emerson's
works are lined up – just a sober row of
books, but I think of them as buzzing and
humming with success-potential.
It will be easy to spot the volume that
contains Compensation. It will be the
volume most thumbed. Yet alas, that
volume may be missing. Some over-eager
student has borne it off to help him write his
term paper, and has kept it, or some man
who wonders why he never got ahead has
made it his own, to read over and over.
Spare a sigh for those who do not realize
the failure-potential that is inherent in
stealing – and do your bit for others by
buying the library another copy.

Secure a copy for yourself, too. Once you
have read Compensation three times, you
will read it a hundred times. You will want it
at your bedside. It is a must for people who
want

to

understand

themselves,

understand the world and find wonderful
peace of mind that will stay with them.
The Law of Compensation in action.
Before we finish this chapter, we shall
come back to that essay which is perhaps
the most important ever written. Now I want
to tell you a story in several parts. I know it
is a true story. I lived it.
As you know, I have made mistakes and I
have yielded at times to the wrong kind of
emotions. Had I not learned from my
mistakes I would not consider myself
worthy of giving advice; but, very definitely,
I have learned from them and built success

and peace of mind upon my hard-won
knowledge.
Well, there was a time, some decades ago,
when I had been through a personal crisis
and it "got" me. This was connected with an
adventure which, while it brought me
valuable experience, brought me little else.
I found it necessary to make a fresh start
financially, mentally and spiritually.
Being in the downtown business district of
Atlanta, Georgia, I visited my friend and
former business associate Mark Wooding.
He recently had opened a large cafeteria
right in the heart of the business section.
Mark told me his business was in serious
difficulty. He had not taken into account the
fact

that

downtown

Atlanta

business

houses close early each evening – or at

least they did in that era. After that early
close of business, the district was as quiet
as a graveyard.
The result was that he did splendidly at
lunchtime but had very few customers at
the dinner hour when he had counted on
making a good part of his income. Was
there any way of persuading people to
have dinner at his cafeteria? He hadn't
thought of any.
My mind had been filled with my own
problems. But I had learned long before
that when one cannot find the solution to
his own problems, the best thing he can do
is to look for someone with a greater
problem and help him find its solution. I
switched my thoughts to a consideration of
my friend's predicament.

Looking around, I noted he had a beautiful,
large dining room which could seat several
hundred

people.

His

equipment

was

superb. The location was good, on a comer
near transportation and parking facilities.
People could reach the cafeteria easily and
they would eat well and pleasantly when
they got there. How to bring them in?
I decide to give away information I had
been in the habit of selling. The answer
flashed into my mind. I suggested to Mark
that I give a lecture course on the Science
of Personal Achievement. I would lecture
each night, right there in the dining room.
The lectures would be free to all who came
for dinner and remained for the lectures.
We announced this plan through the local
newspapers.

We

sent

printed

announcements to all the business houses
in the district. And The first night we turned away more people
than we could seat. There was seldom a
night thereafter when we did not have to
tum away a large number of people from
the completely filled dining room. Mark's
dinners became the major source of his
income in record time.
The cost? Just the cost of the advertising. I
had been in the habit of charging for my
services as a lecturer, but now I donated
my services without charge to a friend who
needed a helping hand. That set certain
invisible forces going. And that is the first
part of the story.
The Law of Compensation begins to work
on my behalf. We are not gifted with crystal

balls with which to foretell the future. If I had
had this power – which an All-Wise mind
wisely has withheld from us – I would have
seen that my unselfish giving marked the
most important turning point of my life.
Even

now,

in

considering

the

compensation I eventually received for my
services, I realize I am still being well paid.
Before we go any further, remember this I
cured my own ills by helping a friend cure
his. Pause right now and think how you can
apply that mighty principle which always
pays, and often in far more than money.
My lectures on the success philosophy
attracted a wide variety of people to
Wooding's cafeteria. Among them were
several business executives, including an
executive of the Georgia Power Company.
This man was so impressed by the lectures

that he asked me to be the guest speaker
at a private meeting of the leading officers
of

several

southern

electric

power

companies.
The Law of Compensation was humming
and buzzing all around me.
In the audience at that private meeting was
Homer Pace, an executive of the South
Carolina Electric & Gas Company. After I
had spoken, he introduced himself. He told
me he had been a student of the Science
of Personal Achievement for many years.
He said "I have a friend I'd like you to meet.
He is president of a small college and owns
a good-sized printing house. He speaks
your language so well that I strongly
suspect he is another of your long-distance

students. You ought to know each other.
Will you write to him?"
I wrote promptly. The college president and
publisher came immediately to Atlanta to
call upon me. Perhaps the shade of the
Sage of Concord – as Emerson was called
– smiled over my shoulder during the twohour conversation. The college president
and I made a verbal agreement. I would
move to his home town and re-write my
entire Philosophy and he would publish it.
Patterns appear in many lives. As you see,
when I have needed a publisher, merely
following my own Philosophy always
helped me find one.
On the first of January , I began work
on the Science of Personal Achievement
now being taught in schools which I

sponsor

throughout

this

and

other

countries.
I find a very special Compensation.
Looking back, I see that the reversals I had
suffered

just

prior

to

meeting

Mark

Wooding had left me in something of a
state of shock. Now I transmuted that
shock into hard work, a labor of love. Every
misfortune always carries the seed of an
equivalent or greater benefit. Soon I found
peace of mind such as I never had known.
Before I describe the third episode in this
many-sided story of Compensation, let me
make clear that romance definitely was not
on my mind. As for marriage, it did not
seem like anything that ever would happen
to me. Yet a peaceful and active mind is not
afraid of new ideas – or new conditions.

When I had moved to that little South
Carolina town I took an apartment that
happened to be near the home of the
publisher's secretary. For several months
after my arrival, I saw the secretary only at
her desk, in the ordinary course of
business.
She had been the support of her family
since her father had died while she was
quite young. She now had been associated
with two generations of the family that
owned the business, she had a responsible
position, and she was quite happy in her
work. Between family responsibilities – she
helped to educate her younger sisters –
and the demands of holding down an
executive job, she was very busy. She had
given little thought to marriage; one might
say it was the last thing on her mind.

And now perhaps a little pagan cherub with
a bow and arrow smiled over my shoulder.
Now and then I invited the secretary to join
me for dinner. Now and again we went to a
show in one of the nearby towns. I found
out that the moment she got away from
family and office matters, she had quite a
different

personality.

A

wonderful

personality.
That woman was almost a perfect duplicate
of the greatest woman I ever had known –
my stepmother. No wonder I admired her!
The picture began to develop rapidly. We
took motor trips. On Sunday mornings we
listened

together

to

the

Mormon

Tabernacle radio services while we were
driving in the country.
The Law of Compensation works in ways
that are strange and unpredictable. I parted

from this woman who attracted me so
deeply.
First of all – the pattern again – I lost my
publisher. The attack on Pearl Harbor and
the events that followed affected my
publisher's affairs so strongly that he
brought our arrangement to an abrupt end.
Then I left town This event arose from the
telephone

call

from

the

LeTourneau

Company which I have related, and I took
over

that

important

public

relations

assignment at their plant in Georgia.
There I was destined to meet the greatest
opportunity of my life to demonstrate the
soundness of my Philosophy as a builder
of

harmonious

relations

between

employees and employer. With all modesty
I can say that my influence in that plant,

with its two thousand employees, changed
everyone for the better, including top
management. Later I read that the war in
the Pacific depended heavily for its
success on U.S. ability to move quantities
of earth and rock in building airstrips on
occupied

islands.

LeTourneau

earth-

moving machinery was largely used on
those jobs, and perhaps indirectly I made
my contribution.
Again, one opportunity led to another. I
decided on another move to make my
Philosophy all the more available to
industry. I would prepare a film about it –
and this caused a move to Los Angeles,
hub of the motion picture industry.
I had not forgotten that wonderful woman in
South Carolina. She had not forgotten me.
The day before I left for the West Coast,

she became my wife. She is also my
secretary,

my

priceless

business

associate, and the most important member
of my Master Mind group. We have now
delighted in more than twenty years of this
perfect

partnership.

Talk

about

compensation!
"Every act rewards itself." That is Emerson
speaking. We shall visit with him soon. You
realize, I am sure, that the reward of any
act may not be a "reward" as such, but
rather a penalty if that is what the act
deserves. The act rewards itself, not you,
in the sense that is meant here, and so the
"reward" is fitting.
This, you may say, is nothing but oldfashioned morality. Indeed it is. It is modern
morality as well, valid when man invented
the wheel, valid when, perhaps, man will

invent the means to duplicate himself in a
test tube. And it is more than morality. I
have shown you the Law of Compensation
at work in my life in the hope that you will
stop and think of ways it has worked for
you.

You

will

see

these

ways

as

manifestations of cause and effect. You
performed some action and that "got the
ball rolling." But can it be an accident that
thousands of years of commentary refer to
the fact that the act of giving invariably
precedes the act of receiving? That when
we "cast bread upon the waters" it does
come back?
We see the Law of Compensation as it
brings us a better job, a sum of money, an
opportunity to fulfill ourselves, a meeting
with someone who turns out to be a lifelong
partner in love and there is much we do not

see. Unseen, silent forces influence us
constantly. Some are good for us, some
are harmful. This volume speaks on many
pages

of

the

solid,

bread-and-butter

aspects of life; but it speaks as well of the
unseen and the omnipresent. As I show
you how to be rich with peace of mind, I
also show you how to choose the friendly,
invisible forces rather than the unfriendly,
and how to make the favorable forces your
allies.
Now let us sit down with Mr. Emerson by
candlelight in his book-lined study
Every act rewards itself, or, in other words,
integrates itself in a twofold manner – first,
in the thing, or in real nature; and secondly,
in the circumstance, or in apparent nature.
Men call the circumstance the retribution.
The casual retribution is in the thing and is

seen by the soul. The retribution in the
circumstance

is

seen

by

the

understanding; it is inseparable from the
thing, but is often spread over a long time,
and so does not become distinct until after
many years.
The specific stripes may follow late after
the offense, but they follow because they
accompany it. Crime and punishment grow
out of one stem. Punishment is a fruit that
unsuspected ripens within the flower of the
pleasure which concealed it. Cause and
effect, means and ends, seed and fruit,
cannot be severed; for the effect already
blooms in the cause, the end pre-exists in
the means, the fruit in the seed.
Think back upon the story I have told you
in detail; the four episodes of success in my
life which began at Wooding's in Atlanta.

The cause behind those episodes was a
simple act of service rendered to a friend I
was able to help. It brought me blessings
which still continue. Had I substituted for
my act of service some selfish or unworthy
act, I would not now enjoy those blessings
but might still suffer under the penalty
which the same Law of Compensation
surely would have brought my way.
"There is a third silent party to all our
bargains." Remember that! The Sage of
Concord continues
Men suffer all their life long, under the
foolish superstition that they can be
cheated. But it is as impossible for a man
to be cheated by anyone but himself, as for
a thing to be, and not to be, at the same
time. There is a third silent party to all our
bargains. The nature and soul of things

takes on itself the guaranty of the fulfillment
of every contract, so that honest service
cannot come to loss. If you serve an
ungrateful master, serve him the more. Put
God in your debt. Every stroke shall be
repaid. The longer the payment is withheld,
the better for you; for compound interest on
compound interest is the rate and usage of
this exchequer.
The third silent party! There is the unseen
force which in its timeless way makes sure
of "the fulfillment of every contract" we
make with the world. And now let us see
how Emerson expresses his understanding
of the fact that every adversity carries with
it the seed of an equivalent or greater
benefit
The changes which break up at short
intervals the prosperity of men, are

advertisements of a nature whose law is
growth. Evermore it is the order of nature
to grow, and every soul is by this intrinsic
necessity quitting its whole system of
things, its friends, and home, and laws, and
faith, as the shellfish crawls out of its
beautiful but stony case, because it no
longer admits of its growth, and slowly
forms

a

new

house.

And

yet

the

compensations of calamity are made
apparent to the understanding also, after
long intervals of time. A fever, a mutilation,
a cruel disappointment, a loss of wealth, a
loss of friends seems at the moment unpaid
loss, and unpayable. But the sure years
reveal the deep remedial force that
underlies all facts.
The death of a dear friend, wife, brother,
lover, which seemed nothing but privation,

somewhat later assumes the aspect of a
guide or genius; for it commonly operates
revolutions in our way of life, terminates an
epoch of infancy or of youth which was
waiting to be closed, breaks up a wanted
occupation, or a household, or style of
living, and allows the formation of new ones
more friendly to the growth of character. It
permits or constrains the formation of new
acquaintances, and the reception of new
influences that prove of the first importance
to the next years; and the man or woman
who would have remained a sunny garden
flower, with no room for its roots and too
much sunshine for its head, by the falling of
the walls and the neglect of the gardener,
is made the banyan of the forest, yielding
shade and fruit to wide neighborhoods of
men.

If Emerson had not written those lines long
before I was born, I might well believe he
was writing directly to me. Do you sense,
perhaps, that he was writing directly to
you? Please, as you read, take my
experiences as reminders to consider your
own. The lessons I have learned have been
learned by millions, and none of us is very
different from his brother.
I am particularly indebted to Emerson for
his views on the subject of fear. They were
responsible for a self-imposed house
cleaning which removed from my mind all
breeding places of fear, and I hope the
following paragraph does the same for you.
Fear is an instructor of great sagacity....
One thing he always teaches, that there is
rottenness where he appears. He is a
carrion crow, and though you see not well

what he hovers for, there is death
somewhere. Our property is timid, our laws
are timid, our cultivated classes are timid.
Fear for ages has boded and mowed and
gibbered our government and property.
That obscene bird is not there for nothing.
He indicates great wrongs which must be
revised.
And although I once had a tendency to
envy seemingly more fortunate persons,
that tendency left me after I was influenced
by the following excerpt from Emerson's
essay on Compensation
Every excess causes a defeat; every
defeat an excess. Every sweet hath its
sour; every evil its good. Every faculty
which is a receiver of pleasure has an
equal penalty put on its abuse. It is to
answer for its moderation with its life. For

every grain of wit there is a grain of folly.
For everything you have missed, you have
gained something else; and for everything
you gain, you lose something. If riches
increase, they are increased that use them.
If the gatherer gathers too much, nature
takes out of the man what she puts into his
chest; swells the estate but kills the owner.
Nature hates monopolies and exceptions.
The waves of the sea do not more speedily
seek a level from their loftiest tossing than
the varieties of condition tend to equalize
themselves. There is always some leveling
circumstance

that

puts

down

the

overbearing, the strong, the rich, the
fortunate, substantially on the same ground
with all others.
Those who have tested Emerson's views
find them based on eternal truth. Others

who do not really test them may consider
them an abstract preachment or may point
to all kinds of "exceptions" which are not
exceptions at all, for time is an essential
element of compensation, and nobody can
tell what time will bring.
Finally, let us join this great mind in thinking
about thinking.
Beware, when the great God lets loose a
thinker on this planet. Then all things are at
risk. It is as when a conflagration has
broken out in a great city, and no man
knows what is safe, or where it will end.
There is not a piece of science, but its flank
may be turned tomorrow; there is not any
literary reputation, not the so-called eternal
names of fame, that may not be revised
and condemned. The very hope of man,
the thoughts of his heart, the religion of

nations, the manners and morals of
mankind, are all at the mercy of a new
generalization.
Thus, the power of mind-force to change
the world. You may not change the world,
but your mind-force is ready, willing and
able to cause in your world the changes
you need and want, no matter how mighty
they may be. Emerson is not alone in
celebrating the power of thought to "move
mountains." I do not know of any other
great thinker whose works do not show this
inherent understanding – that we are
thinking beings who act according to our
thoughts; so that thought always precedes
action, thought always builds before the
hands build, thought is mighty beyond
measurement – and so is achievement

mighty when the thoughts behind it are
unfettered and unafraid.
The philosopher as a practical person.
We tend to think of philosophers as people
who dwell in ivory towers of thought and
come up with books that take a lot of
learning before you can understand them.
There is considerable truth in this picture.
Philosophy has come so far since the
ancient Greeks first mused upon the world
and man that, these days, the philosophers
seem to be talking to the philosophers and
we ordinary folk are out in the cold.
Consider, however, that the basic purpose
of philosophy is to search out the why of
things. That is why the Science of Personal
Achievement is a philosophy rather than a
method or a system. In my previous books,

as in this one, I give the truly basic answers
to the questions
Why do some men succeed in life while
others fail? Why do some individuals and
couples live in harmony while others live in
constant conflict? Why do some groups get
along with other groups in a spirit of mutual
help, while others hamper and frustrate
each other?
While the methods by which you make
money, or handle your affairs, or please
your wife, or preserve harmony between
management and labor are important – and
I show you a number of the key methods –
it is the underlying philosophy which is
more important still. When your mind holds
firmly to the basic concepts of wealth,
peace of mind and life-success, you build
on a firm foundation. When you try to apply

methods merely in themselves, you may
find you are trying to build on sand.
Thus, it pays to be a philosopher in a
perfectly practical sense. Faced with a
problem, or desirous of improving some
situation or influencing some other person
for your mutual benefit – pause and
remember you are a practical philosopher.
Thus, you focus your mind upon the basic
reasons which always have worked and
always will, and immediately you are well
guided.
The philosopher in action. Does the
philosopher meet with some disaster or
misfortune? He looks for the cause, he
seeks the lesson, he armors himself
against the event ever happening again.

Likewise, he notices the mistakes other
people make. Knowing that human beings
are very like one another, he watches for
any tendency in himself to make the same
mistake and thus almost surely will not
make it.
The philosopher can foretell the future no
more than can others. He knows, however,
that history has a way of repeating itself; he
takes inventory of the past and often can
evoke a very valid idea of the future.
The philosopher bears firmly in mind that
the way to help others is to help them find
their best selves. He does not try to
become a reformer and let himself in for
endless effort which is not likely to do much
good.

Being a philosopher, such a man knows
that time is the great leveler. He is patient,
and the days and years are his allies, never
his adversaries.
Knowing that a peaceful mind is likewise an
efficient mind, the philosopher allows no
heckling from the kind of emotions which
upset the mind and make it incapable of
conceiving greatly.
Knowing there is no limit to mind-power,
the philosopher does not hem in his powers
with small, mean thinking, but thinks in
those generous and wide-ranging terms
upon which achievement is built.
The philosopher-businessman does not
confuse today's profit with a lifetime's
peace of mind and life-success. He will not,

therefore, take unfair advantage of anyone,
for "every act rewards itself."
The philosopher knows that thoughts are
things; that every thought he sends forth,
be it good or bad, comes back in due time,
greatly multiplied, to curse him or to bless
him according to its nature.
The chains of the past never drag after a
philosopher with their mournful clank of
looking backward. He knows that success
lies ahead, life lies ahead, and only takes
from the past whatever may have been a
valuable lesson.
The true philosopher never slanders
another person, and when he feels he must
give way to righteous indignation, he does
not do this as though it were his way of life.
(It could be, for a philosopher). He

expresses his indignation as though he
were writing it on the sand, at the water's
edge, and hopes no man passes that way
before the tide comes in.
Sharing is part of a true philosophy, so the
philosopher shares freely, knowing that as
he shares his blessings he prepares for
new blessings. He knows that sharing
plants opportunity for self-benefit which is
well earned and well deserved, and that is
the kind of benefit he wants to come to him.
As philosophers, we passed this book
in review. Yes, in our role as seekers of the
truths behind human nature and human
conduct, we have reviewed much of this
book to this page. As a philosopher, remind
yourself of the usefulness of review, for the
human mind learns by repetition and
reinforcement until at length the truth is the

rule. The very word philosopher is made of
two Greek words meaning love and truth. A
philosopher is a lover of the truth.
I close this chapter with an anecdote about
my grandfather. He believed, as I do, that
people learn best from experience. There
is a bite in this anecdote, but I believe it
helped to teach a bit of philosophy to a
certain "city slicker."
The person to whom I refer stood at the
side of the country road which I traveled
with my grandfather from Powell's River,
Virginia, on our way back home with a load
of hay. I was very young; young enough to
be impressed with the stranger's sharp
clothing and superior manner.
He did not ask for a ride but jumped onto
the slow-moving wagon and said "Give us

a ride, hayseed." Grandfather made no
reply. The horse ambled on and we left
some miles of dusty road behind us.
When we had reached Grandfather's place
and turned in toward his barn, the stranger
slid off the wagon and said "Hey, how far
is it to Big Stone Gap from here?" "We-ell,"
said Grandfather consideringly, "if you start
walking back the way we came, it is about
twenty miles. If you keep on the way we
were going, I'd say it's about twenty-five
thousand."
Once more the Supreme Secret has
touched your mind, perhaps to stay,
perhaps to return later and stay with you
always.
Checking on  
The Law of Compensation

Emerson's

essay

on

Compensation

remains one of the most important essays
ever written. It is a must for anyone who
wants to understand himself and the world
in which he lives, and to find peace of mind
all his life. Once the author of this book was
in serious difficulty, but he still gave his time
and services free to a friend; and his
compensation from this act has covered
many years and still continues. Unseen
forces are at work among us, and this book
shows you how to choose the friendly
forces rather than the unfriendly.
Every act rewards itself
The law of Compensation in its visible
aspects, as for instance when it brings an
opportunity following some action, may
seem like nothing more than cause and
effect. But, as Emerson says, there is a

third silent party to all our bargains, and this
is the unseen force which balances the
books in the end. Men may believe they
can be cheated, but it is impossible for a
man to be cheated by anyone but himself,
and although recompense may seem long
in coming, there is a kind of spiritual
compound interest which we receive at
last.
Strength from adversity
The law of nature is growth, says Emerson.
He remarks that this growth often includes
adversities of many kinds, yet a deep
remedial force operates to turn hardship
and sorrows into guides for later life, and
these same hardships often serve to end
some period of life which was waiting to be
closed. Also, adversity breaks off certain
accustomed ways of living and helps us

form new ones which may be necessary for
growth. The person who is tempered by
hardship becomes a stronger person who
can do more for himself and more for
others.
Mind-force can change your world
Emerson is not the only philosopher who
celebrates the power of the mind and
points to the changes a great mind makes
in the world. Your own mind can change
your world. Turn yourself into a philosopher
and search out the basic reasons for
success and happiness; go back to these
reasons for guidance before you turn to
bread-and-butter methods, and you build
on a solid foundation. In considering
yourself as a philosopher you can review
this book up to this chapter, applying every
basic principle you have learned and

remembering how each principle is used in
action.

  You Are Very Important for
a Little While
Your success is yours to make or break,
but it never can be bigger than mankind. No
matter how high you heap your fortune, in
the end it counts for nothing. A successful
life leaves its own monuments. In the
Jungle of Life we walk alone in a way beset
with dangers, but within our minds we keep
the means to defeat the mind's enemies,
build powers of true wealth and abiding
happiness. We walk alone yet there is
evidence that we are watched from the
world beyond our senses. Even this
mysterious world is concerned with guiding
us to wealth now, to peace of mind now.
HE was a youngish man, not yet thirty, and
he told me he was "raking it in" on shortterm rentals of cars and trucks. He let me

know how wise he was to leave the longterm leasing business to others; how wise
he was to offer a lot of free mileage and
make up the apparent giveaway in other
ways; how wise he was in giving people a
choice of insurance plans since they
invariably chose the broadest protection,
which was the most expensive, but did not
have to be advertised as part of his daily
rental rate; how wise he was in investing
his profits in the stock market at the right
time ... in short, how wise he was.
I almost remarked on all the factors which
had

combined

to

help

him.

The

development of the modem car, for
instance, which costs so much to buy and
maintain that it is worth renting by the day;
and the development of good highways,
and even the development of the credit

card system which helped his business
thrive. But no, he took no philosophic view
of anything – and if the stock market
happened to be going up when he
happened to invest, chances were he
would take credit for that too.
I merely reflected back upon the successful
men I have known who made their money
in everything from the manufacture of
kerosene lamps to the giving of courses in
computer programming. Some of them saw
where they fitted into the scheme of things,
and they were the men I had admired more
than the others, who saw only their own
ability to ride the crest of the timely wave.
The ones who had had perspective upon
life also tended to be the ones who had
peace of mind. They were very big men,
some of them, but they knew the world

around them was bigger than they, and
considerably more important.
Andrew Carnegie was well aware of this. At
one time he believed that I was beginning
to assume a feeling of superiority because
of my association with him. He had me
write out the following motto
"Don't take yourself too damned seriously,
unless you wish to be damned by others."
This motto did me some good at the time,
later faded into my submerged memories;
perhaps it was at such times as when I
could be happy with nothing less than two
Rolls-Royces.
Now I see there was nothing wrong with the
Rolls-Royces,

nor

with

my

Catskill

Mountain estate for that matter; it was my
attitude that was wrong. I took myself too

"damned" seriously. The splash I made in
the world mattered more than my respect
for the world which had given me my
opportunities.
I look back upon that time and upon similar
times, and I see I had a peculiarly guilty
conscience. I had committed no crimes. In
those days, however, if a glance into the
rear-view mirror of my Rolls-Royce showed
a traffic policeman coming up behind, I
grew instantly uneasy even if I was driving
several miles an hour under the speed limit.
As for a policeman's coming to my door ...
if it ever had happened, I would have
quaked in my boots.
Whence came the fear? Surely from the
tensions I had worked up. Now those
tensions are gone, for I know my place in
the world and my mind is at peace. Now,

when I see a traffic policeman coming up
behind my car, I am glad to see him, for I
know that his presence evokes careful
driving and fewer hazards on the road.
And finally, a short time ago, a policeman
in uniform did ring my doorbell. It was only
after he had gone that I realized I might
have felt some apprehension – but I didn't.
I was merely curious to know why he had
come to my door. He asked me politely if a
certain person lived in my house. No, I
informed him, that person once had lived in
the house, but had moved away when I had
purchased the place. He thanked me and
that was that.
Ultimately, nothing matters. I have
thought for some time about the best way
in which to explain this spirit in which one's
affairs are important but not all-important;

this spirit in which one can find great
success and great wealth and yet retain
proper perspective upon oneself and one's
affairs – a perspective which is so
necessary for peace of mind.
Much of what already has been said in this
book is connected with this very important
matter. Thus, when one continually gives to
his fellow men, he both shows and feels
that his personality is not built merely upon
his possessions. I know I have given to the
world more than I have taken from it, and
this is a great source of contentment to me.
Again, the ability to relax, play, live some
hours of every day exactly according to
your own ideas of pleasurable relaxation –
this too brings perspective. I hope by now
you have found this out for yourself.

After some testing, however, I have
decided

to

emphasize

the

phrase

Ultimately, nothing matters. When you are
grimly involved in getting, when the world
seems to exist only within your own circle
of activities, when something you have built
or bought begins to shut out the sight of the
sun

–

remember,

ultimately,

nothing

matters. Say it aloud "Ultimately, nothing
matters!"
A negative counsel? By no means.
Ultimately, nothing matters. Everything
matters in its time and in its place – and
give everything its due. Yet reserve a small
comer of the consciousness for the ultimate
which

maintains

perspective,

which

recognizes the ages as well as today. It
makes you more peaceful, it makes you

more sure of yourself, and it makes you
stronger.
How I found out. Beyond that curtain
which men can penetrate with the aid of
their five senses, I have some friends who
now and then communicate with me.
One night during the first world war, as I
was about to retire, I felt a strong urge to
turn to my typewriter and write something.
I was then a confidential counselor to
Woodrow Wilson and there were matters of
urgent

national

and

international

importance crowding my mind. Yet when I
had inserted a sheet of paper into the
machine and placed my fingers upon its
keyboard, only three words came into my
consciousness. They were so vividly
pushed into my mind by unseen forces that
my fingers tapped them out in capitals

ULTIMATELY, NOTHING MATTERS.
I do not know how to explain what followed,
so I shall attempt no explanation. Perhaps
it was coincidence; perhaps not.
At any rate, on that same typewriter, a short
time later, I worked on a message which I
helped Woodrow Wilson write. Had the
message been made public at the time, it
would have changed the entire course of
World War I. Certainly it seemed this
message mattered.
Three days after the Armistice was signed,
I saw a newspaper lying in the gutter. Its
front page bore a facsimile of the message.
Did it matter? It had become utterly
valueless with the lapse of a few days. With
a shock of recognition my mind filled with
the thought Ultimately, nothing matters.

Some time passed. Woodrow Wilson
became the guiding spirit behind the great
new League of Nations. He believed that
the future of civilization depended on the
United States Senate's ratification. The
Senate would not ratify. Mr. Wilson took to
his bed, and no matter what bulletins the
doctors issued, we who were close to him
knew he was dying of heartbreak and
despair.
I came to his bedside. He looked at me
hopelessly and murmured 'Those men on
Capitol Hill have killed me."
Neither he nor I could say at that time that
the world was not ready for the League of
Nations plan. Yet something prompted me
to say what might have been considered
unfitting – and turned out to be the best
words I could have said.

"Mr. President," I said, "ultimately, nothing
matters." He looked at me with a strange,
slowly comprehending expression and
finally said "Of course not!"
Perhaps I helped him pass more peacefully
into death. I know that the phrase has
stayed strongly with me since, and I feel it
was not of my own invention – it was placed
in my mind by unseen, wiser powers who
wished me to have it at that point in my life.
Nothing matters ultimately, so why fill your
life with fear? Often, I have noticed men
and women who go through life afraid of
this and afraid of that – as though they had
tuned in on some cosmic wave-length
which made fear an absolute virtue.
They had not tuned in, but rather had tuned
out any influences beyond their own tiny

affairs, which their own minds expanded to
fill their cosmos. Fear is such a little thing!
Of course we go through life with "a decent
respect for the opinions of mankind," as the
Declaration of Independence says, and
now and then we defer to others and put
their welfare ahead of our own. This is
cooperation, not fear. It is civilization rather
than anarchy. Yet look around and see how
many

people

stretch

their

social

consciences into consciences full of fear,
depression and self-defeat. Why? – when
ultimately, nothing matters? Do they think
that if they slink through life instead of
marching with head up, they will make their
lives matter the more after they are dead?
Marching through life with confidence and
courage is a far more likely way to make
yourself remembered; not a sure way, but

far, far more likely. Again, if they are not
concerned

with

the

size

of

their

tombstones, nor the flowers placed upon
their graves, nor the prayers said in their
memory – this is all the more reason for
living fearlessly.
I once saw a book with the title I Write As I
Please. I never was able to read the book,
but I hope it lived up to its admirable title.
Any man who dares to write as he pleases
has gone a great distance toward finding
peace of mind and holding it firmly.
This too I learned by trial and error. There
was a time when an impressive corps of
critics went over every line I wrote before
my writings got into print. Then I began to
see that I was being made to please the
reader by pandering to his established

prejudices and beliefs. What good would I
do in that case?
Now I write as I please and let the chips fall
where they may. Perhaps you have noticed
this.
Do you remember Elbert Hubbard?
Sometimes great men come and go
through this world without having their true
greatness appreciated. Such a one was
Elbert Hubbard. Writing as he pleased in a
small town in New York State, he made
ripples spread around the world. One of his
greatest short pieces was A Message to
Garcia. One of his books, Elbert Hubbard's
Scrapbook, used to be found lying open in
many a parlor, and you would be well
advised to ask a dealer in used books to
find a copy for you.

He was a man who had learned how to live
his own life and own his own mind despite
what others might think about him. He told
me that this freedom gave him more
satisfaction than all the glory the world
might have showered upon him if he had
written to please others.
In his earlier years, publishers looked over
his writings and pronounced them too
advanced

for

their

time.

Refused

publication, he decided to become his own
publisher. He did so well in the publishing
business that at one time he employed
eight hundred people.
Hubbard was far more than a successful
writer and successful publisher. He was
one of those rare souls who make life
payoff in their own terms; who collect their
pay as they go, and never limit it to money;

who extract dividends from everything that
affects their lives and find a benefit in every
experience.
He became rich. He had a good deal more
money than he needed. Yet unlike some
other rich men, every day that he lived he
tarried by the wayside of life. It would be a
wonderful

world

if

all

men

made

themselves as free, as useful, as happy
and as peaceful as Elbert Hubbard.
Neither Hubbard nor Emerson had to be
reminded that ultimately, nothing matters.
Yet they, and others like them, have left
behind them a legacy far greater than
legacies left by those who believed that
everything they did was the most important
event in the world.

Take your cue from nature. What is the
only permanent state of affairs throughout
the universe? It is change – eternal change
– as nature forever builds, evolves, tears
down, rebuilds in an ever-onward march
toward some destiny unknown to man.
The whims of mankind mean nothing to
nature. Time means nothing to nature. Of
space and of matter she has abundance,
and surely it matters not to nature that man
now and then finds out a few secrets; there
are many more!
Nature balances the births and deaths of
men so that we perpetuate ourselves and
the race goes on. Forever? That is not
nature's concern. If she has set up laws
which in time will wipe out man, his earth,
perhaps his moon as well, perhaps the
entire solar system – then that is nature's

law and it is inexorable. If man himself
should devastate his planet, nature will
handle the charred and lifeless globe with
the same forces of gravitation that handled
it when it teemed with animals, plants and
humanity.
Ultimately, nothing matters in nature.
Ponder this and you will begin to feel the
cosmos as it should be felt – neither
threatening nor promising. If there is a
Heaven somewhere out yonder, I say again
that you cannot prove or disprove it; the
wisest man alive today cannot prove or
disprove it; the wisest man who ever lived
could not prove or disprove it. You are far,
far better off – and so are your fellow men
– if you believe with Emerson that
compensation,

retribution,

punishment,

reward, the balancing of accounts and the
paying of debts – come in this world.
Hubbard and Rockefeller. When I think of
Elbert Hubbard, often I think of John D.
Rockefeller, Sr. They were so different!
Once Rockefeller asked me if I would like
to change places with him. I told him
politely that I would not; that I valued my
health and my freedom, neither of which he
enjoyed. I doubt if my remarks had
anything to do with the obvious change
which came over him a good many years
before he died. But that change did come,
and I see it as a new start in his life. Yes,
the man who had billions found something
lacking and attempted to make a new start
in life.

What did he really want? By checking with
those who knew him, I firmly believe that he
wanted nothing more than what he had
missed in his fabulous money-making
career – peace of mind. I think that one day
he looked at his money and it occurred to
him

that

ULTIMATELY,

NOTHING

MATTERS. Ivy Lee's association with the
Rockefeller interests was part of an effort
to present to the world another side of the
Rockefeller,

Sf.

nature.

When

the

Rockefeller money began to flow into
scientific, health and cultural projects, it
signaled a kind of rebirth.
Elbert Hubbard never needed to change
the image he presented to the world and
himself. But Rockefeller, Sf. did, and so did
Henry Ford, and so did many another man
who seemed to be  percent successful

– until he found that something was
definitely lacking, nevertheless.
It is interesting to note that John D.'s
descendants seem to have developed
many useful social characteristics which
simply were not popular among rich men in
John D.'s day. Now I see that a greatgrandson is occupied with social work – not
merely through his money, but right down
there where the poor live with their lack.
Since John D. did change, I do not think he
is turning over in his grave.
Through the Jungle of Life with unseen
watchers. You know this book has been
nearly seventy years in the making. I have
intimated, too, that in those decades I did
not know I would write a book which
equates wealth with peace of mind, but
somehow felt I would. Obviously, I could

not write it as a young man nor even as a
fifty-year-old man, for I had not gathered
the necessary experience. Obviously, I
could not write it, either, until I had learned
well, and tested thoroughly, every bit of
advice I give. That advice has been tested
in many lives besides my own, and the
stories I tell brim with life lessons you will
learn for yourself – which is the best way to
learn them.
Now and again I have had evidence that
unseen

friends

hover

about

me,

unknowable to ordinary senses. In my
studies I discovered there is a group of
strange beings who maintain a school of
wisdom which must be ten thousand years
old, but I did not connect them with myself.
Now I have found there is a connection. I

am not one of them! – but I have been
watched by them. Here is how I found it out.
I finished this book. And then... One day
I knew the time had come to write this book.
Perhaps the brief illness I had at that time,
during which I outlined the book, was
planned by those others to draw my mind
away from day-to-day affairs. I wrote the
book, enjoying it as one always enjoys a
labor of love. It took a number of months,
during which I felt highly alive and happy.
I completed the last chapter and still sat
before my typewriter, musing on what I had
written. Ultimately, nothing matters, I
thought – yet it is good to have achieved
that which the mind has conceived for so
long a time. I was alone in my study and all
was very still.

A voice spoke. I saw nobody. I cannot tell
you whence the voice came. First it spoke
a password known to few men, that riveted
my attention.
"I have come," said the voice, "to give you
one more section to include in your book.
In writing this section you may cause some
readers to disbelieve you, yet you will write
honestly, and many will believe and be
benefited. The world has been given many
philosophies by which men are prepared
for death, but you have been chosen to
give mankind a philosophy by which men
are prepared for happy living." I whispered
"Who are you?"
In a softened voice, which sounded like
chimes of great music, the unseen speaker
replied "I come from the Great School of
the Masters. I am one of the Council of

Thirty-Three who serve the Great School
and its initiates on the physical plane."
The Great Schools of the Masters!
That is the school of wisdom which has
persisted secretly in the Himalayas for ten
thousand years. Sometimes known as the
Venerable Brotherhood of Ancient India, it
is the great central reservoir of religious,
philosophical, moral, physical, spiritual and
psychical knowledge.
Patiently this school strives to lift mankind
from spiritual infancy and darkness to
maturity of soul and final illumination.
From the remotest days of antiquity, the
Masters

of

the

communicated
telepathy.

Great

School

have

with

each

other

by

Eventually

they

met

and

organized themselves into the world's
oldest association.
"These Masters," says J. E. Richardson in
The Great Message, "are the Great
Teachers who, through all human history,
have not only declared their personal
knowledge of another life, but have made
the

personal

demonstration

of

their

knowledge in such manner as to leave no
possible doubt in the minds of their
disciples, or students, as to the fact of that
personal knowledge."
The Great School of the Masters always
has

exercised

its

powers

for

the

constructive unfolding of individual human
intelligence,

in

harmony

with

man's

unchallengeable control over his individual
powers of thought. The Masters believe
that this great prerogative, which has been

reserved for man alone, provides man with
the means by which he may largely control
his earthly destiny.
The

School

has

Masters

who

can

disembody themselves and travel instantly
to any place they choose in order to acquire
essential knowledge, or to give knowledge
directly, by voice, to anyone else. Now I
knew that one of these Masters had come
across thousands of miles, through the
night, into my study.
The Master continues to speak. After
having paused to allow me time in which to
collect my thoughts, the Master continued
in the same great musical voice which
surely would have resounded through the
house had it not been audible to my ears
alone.

I shall not set down every word he said but
shall include the gist of his message. Much
of what he said already has been
presented to you in the chapters of this
book or will follow in other chapters.
"You have earned the right to reveal a
Supreme Secret to others," said the vibrant
voice. "In the journey through life there is a
Jungle of Life, a Black Forest through
which every individual must pass alone. In
the Black Forest he overcomes enemies
and his own inner opposition and turmoil.
The Black Forest helps to give refinement
to the soul of man through struggle and
resistance, so that the soul may return to
the Great Eternal Reservoir from whence it
emerged and become a part of Infinite
Intelligence. You have been under the
guidance of the Great School, but you have

been your own master. You have passed
through the Jungle of Life safely. Now you
must give to the world a blueprint with
which others may traverse that same Black
Forest.
"And now I shall name the enemies who
must be met and conquered in the journey.
The foremost is FEAR. The expression of
fear denies man the use of his true power
of thought – a power which can enable
each individual to acquire all of his physical
needs and control his earthly destiny.
"The next great enemy," said the Master,
"is GREED for the possession of material
things and for power to control others for
selfish ends. No person who is filled with
greed and avarice can pass through the
Jungle of Life and successfully attain and

use the Supreme Secret, for he affronts the
Creator when he violates the rights of
others.
"INTOLERANCE is third on the list of
enemies. Intolerance is the evil partner of
selfishness and ignorance. It closes the
mind and shuts out facts. It deprives a
person of valuable friendships he will need
in his journey through life and repels the
cooperation of others.
"EGOTISM is the fourth great enemy of
man. Self-respect is a most desirable
quality, but selflove is self-deceit and
causes a man to lose his respect for others.
"LUST is the fifth enemy. It prevents sex
emotion from being properly transmuted
and properly directed. It leads to excessive

sexual expressions which dissipate the
vital creative forces of mind and body.
"ANGER, the sixth enemy, is a form of
temporary insanity. Righteous indignation
that is controlled and directed toward the
correction of a cause is occasionally
necessary, but those who live with rage
cannot truly know the Supreme Secret.
"HATRED, the seventh enemy, is anger
which has been allowed to dwell in the
mind until it has hardened like so much
cement.

It

is

a

mind-poison

which

erroneously twists the individual's thinking.
One who harbors hate cannot control and
direct

his

power

of

thought

toward

constructive ends, and thus he is denied
this one and only outright prerogative with
which man has been blessed by the
Creator."

The Master went on while I listened raptly.
He spoke of the enemy of JEALOUSY, that
mixture of covetousness and fear; and of
IMPATIENCE, which prevents cause from
bearing its fruit in effect. He listed DECEIT,
which in the end deceives the deceiver;
FALSEHOOD, which weaves a noose with
which the liar spiritually hangs himself; the
related enemy of INSINCERITY; and
VANITY, which makes men vulgar and
forms a repulsive force.
In the midst of a great silence the
representative of the Great School told me
I had been chosen to tell others of all the
enemies,

including

the

enemies

of

CRUELTY, which attracts all the other
enemies like a pack of wolves, and
MERCILESSNESS, which turns its back
upon those in need and makes the soul

shrivel. He spoke of INJUSTICE, of
SLANDER and of GOSSIP. He pointed out
that one may know the Supreme Secret in
words but cannot use it if he ever attempts
to destroy others. He showed me how the
Black Forest closes in for a lifetime upon
those who do not vanquish the enemies of
UNDEPENDABILITY,

DISHONESTY,

DISLOYALTY and REVENGE.
In concluding with the names of four more
enemies against whom I was to warn the
world, the Master said they were fully as
important in their menace as any of the
others. They were WORRY, which reveals
that a man is no bigger than that which he
allows to worry him; ENVY, a form of
jealousy which most particularly destroys
initiative

and

self-discipline;

HYPOCHONDRIA, which prevents the

mind from conceiving the continued good
health of its bodily temple and so gives ill
health its first foothold, which often is in the
mind; and INDECISION, which grows
stronger the more it is indulged until it rides
one's back and one can fall and lie lost in
the Black Forest.
"There are other enemies of man," the
Master said, "but who conquers these
twenty-six will conquer all the others. Know
that one who seeks earnestly to conquer
these twenty-six lurking enemies becomes
an Initiate of the Great School. We know
him, and he has access to the mind of a
Master. The means of communication is
telepathy. The Initiate may at times convey
his need for instruction through what is
commonly known as prayer."

The principle of prayer. The Master then
told me the principles which lie behind
prayer that can bring true help and
guidance. You who read the mere printed
words should read this section several
times until its great meaning is clear to you.
"Prayer," the Master said, "is to be based
upon a real need for help to accomplish
something of constructive value.
"In true prayer one asks for help only after
he has proved, by his own effort, that his
own powers are not sufficient to enable him
to accomplish his purpose.
"The person who prays for help should not
assume he gives over his own individual
freedom of action, but rather should know
he is to cooperate with the helping
agencies he cannot see.

"He must know, with confident self-respect,
that his first duty is to improve himself and
his condition; and that out of this, when it is
well done, flows his second duty, which is
to help humanity.
"These are the principles we look for in any
prayer. However the prayer may be said or
thought, under whatever conditions, these
principles come through when they are
present

and bespeak the suppliant's

fitness."
The Master now gave a word of caution for
the Initiate who is on his way through the
Jungle. He told me – as I now tell you – that
now and then open spaces appear in that
Black Forest, and as one walks clear of
clinging underbrush, he may think he has
conquered all of the twenty-six enemies.
This may be a deception on the part of the

enemies. A dependable way to keep track
of the enemies one has overcome is to list
them on a chart, thus
•

Fear

•

Cruelty

•

Greed

•

Mercilessness

•

Intolerance

•

Injustice

•

Egotism

•

Slander

•

Lust

•

Gossip

•

Anger

•

Undependability

•

Hatred

•

Dishonesty

•

Jealousy

•

Disloyalty

•

Impatience

•

Revenge

•

Deceit

•

Worry

•

Falsehood

•

Envy

•

Insincerity

•

Hypochondria

•

Vanity

•

Indecision

The list should be checked at least once a
year. Done honestly, and with the insight
and self-knowledge one has gained, such
a check enables one to search his record
and know the names of the defeated
enemies. These are crossed off the list. As
long as one enemy remains, the person
who made the list still wanders in the
Jungle of Life. When every enemy has
been accounted for, he has passed
through the Jungle.
What happens at the end of the great
journey? The Master explained "When
the Initiate has truly conquered all of the
twenty-six enemies of success, peace and
harmony, he will receive a communication
from a Master of the Great School. He will
be assured of his success in having passed

through the Jungle, and he will receive
definite instructions for his future conduct.
"First, he will be shown that a reasonable
part of his time is to be devoted to directing
others who are struggling to pass through
the Jungle, and to helping his fellow men in
every other possible way. He will know
already that a benefit to others benefits
himself, but now he will realize those
benefits in their fullest measure.
"Second, he will be given the power to
handle all adversities so that their eventual
benefit to him always is revealed and he is
conscious of his power to turn adversity
into benefit.
'Third, the Initiate who masters the twentysix enemies of man will quickly recognize
the nature and purpose of any special

mission to which he may be assigned in the
future, and he always will have the courage
to carry out that mission."
The Master went on quickly "The Initiate
retains the power to neglect or deny any of
these requirements, but should he do so,
the

penalty

may

be

the

complete

revocation of the powers he has gained
through many years of devoted effort. The
powers include great blessings
"Hope, faith and courage to carry out any
desired objective.
"Benevolence toward his fellow men, and
compassion for their problems.
"Self-understanding which reveals to him
the nature of his own stupendous powers.

"Endurance and persistence enough to
enable him to overcome all obstacles in his
path.
"Sound health, both physical and mental.
"The wisdom with which to evaluate all
things, and the self-discipline to give him
complete mastery over himself.
"Patience

with

which

to

deal

with

adversities.
"Tolerance toward all, and a true spirit of
brotherly love.
"Freedom from worry.
"Material abundance to meet all his needs
and desires.
"A keen evaluation of time.
"Freedom from all vices.

"A magnetic personality and a spirit of
generosity

which

attracts

friendly

cooperation.
"The ability to profit from his mistakes of the
past.
"A listening ear, a silent tongue, a faithful
heart, a keen sense of loyalty.
"A profound love of truth.
"The

capacity

for

telepathic

communication, including communication
with Infinite Intelligence.
"A true understanding of scientific prayer,
along with the capacity to get aid from the
Masters when it may be needed.
"Immunity against the acts of all evil
persons.
"Release from all inherited negative traits.

"Complete mastery of every kind of fear,
including the fear of death.
"Understanding of the overall purpose of
life, along with the glorious ability to live
according to that purpose."
The Master concludes his message.
Another pause in the deep silence, and the
Master said "He will not only understand
the true purpose of life, but also he will
have at his command the power to fulfill
that purpose without having to experience
another incarnation on this earthly plane.
"And the Masters of the Great School, on
this earthly plane and all other planes, will
rejoice at his triumph and will bid him
Godspeed toward his own Mastership. His
cycle toward Mastership will not have
ended, but he will have spread before him

the

chart

by

which

to

navigate

successfully."
The voice ended. I began to hear little
sounds of the world around me, and I knew
the Master had returned to the Great
School of the Masters.
The inherent lesson in a few words.
Ultimately, nothing matters. Read once
more and see how much of the Master's
message is concerned with here and now,
the time in which we insure, by ourselves,
whether life will reward us or punish us;
whether we will win our dreams or die
unfulfilled. Notice the several ways in which
we are enjoined not to become too meanly
important ... meanly important in a big show
of property or power which counts as
nothing in the scheme of things and can
destroy health and happiness.

As for the Ultimate beyond our earthly
ultimates, we see a vision of a great
reservoir of lifespirit, but we are not
enjoined to walk in awe nor to walk apart
from the affairs of life in some kind of selfassumed sainthood. Goodness in life
devolves upon living, and life was not
planned as a bed of roses, but as a
wholehearted adventure in training oneself
to know and win and enjoy the good.
Already you are qualified to use the
Supreme Secret in many ways. As soon as
you know it – if you do not already know it
– you will see why this is so.
Checking on  
You are very important – for a little while
When you take your affairs too seriously
you steal from your peace of mind. A really

big man knows the world around him is
bigger than he is. The tensions incurred in
trying to "live big" when it is not in your
nature may bring you a guilty conscience
and other troubles. Many really big men
stop by the wayside of life and enjoy
themselves, but small men are afraid to do
this. Andrew Carnegie had a memorable
motto which teaches us not to attempt to
borrow the bigness of others.
Ultimately, nothing matters
When you are grimly involved in getting, it
is time to remind yourself that, ultimately,
nothing matters. Everything matters in its
time

and

place,

but

maintaining

perspective gives you a recognition of the
ages as well as of today. An experience in
"automatic writing" at my typewriter seems
to have been a communication from the

world beyond the five senses to tell me that
nothing matters, ultimately, and to enable
me to pass on the word.
Why fear anything?
Too many people stretch their social
consciences into consciences full of fear,
depression

and

self-defeat.

Marching

through life with courage and confidence
does away with fear, and there is no need
to be concerned with the size of your
tombstone. A fearless, peaceful man
named Elbert Hubbard wrote as he
pleased, published his own works and
made a fortune. Neither Hubbard nor
Emerson

had

to

be

reminded

that,

ultimately, nothing matters.
In the Jungle of Life there is unseen
guidance

The author based much of this book upon
a revelation from the Great School of the
Masters. Twenty-six enemies lie in wait in
the Jungle of Life. Defeat them and you
acquire new ability to live a life of peace,
abundance, success and enjoyment.

  Not Too Much, Not Too
Little
When your mind truly perceives your
potential for wealth, you take advantage of
the wealth building opportunities all around
you. Peace of mind is an essential
ingredient of wealth. Giving in the spirit of
the Golden Rule is closely allied to the
enjoyment of wealth and all else of life's
goodness. When you give service, as in a
job, in the end you will be paid what you are
worth, for you cannot fake the Golden Rule
– it is eternal and immutable and goes hand
in hand with the immutable Law of
Compensation.
THE abundance of the earth waits for you
to gather it in. We have been told this by
the Masters of every school of every
century, and thus we learn from life itself.

What constitutes abundance? You know by
now it is a relative term. Surely one who
does not have enough to eat cannot be
said to enjoy abundance; but there are
those who do not believe they are wealthy
until they can eat their meals from golden
plates. Be wealthy in your own way and you
will know that you are wealthy ... and bear
in mind that even a beggar enjoys the
beauty of the earth, the drift of white clouds
and the sight of a rainbow or a twinkling
star.
This is a practical book nevertheless, and I
am sure you have noticed that I do not
suggest

any

outright

substitute

for

sufficient money. Let us look again at the
question of sufficiency; let us look at its
very beginnings.

Wealth comes to the man who can see a
potential for wealth. I was brought up on
something we called a farm.
Well, it was land, all right, and one could
observe certain crops growing in the fields
and certain animals grazing. A good,
efficient

farmer

would

have

noticed,

however, that a good deal of our "farm"
wasn't a farm at all. It included too much
untilled land which produced the need to
pay taxes, but no food to be eaten or
produce to sell.
We lacked training, we lacked capital and
we lacked quite a few other things – but still
I do not quite know why we let a potential
for (relative) wealth lie there without being
used. It wasn't till years later that I heard
about scientific farming which can produce
more income from ten acres than my father

could have produced from a hundred acres
of equivalent land. Recently I met a truck
farmer who makes a splendid living from
only five acres by scientific rotation of his
crops – and I knew I had met a man who
could see and use his wealth potential.
Notice, however, that the farmer's basic
wealth-potential is not in his land. It is in his
mind – in his willingness to learn good
farming methods and use them, or, going
even farther back, in his willingness to learn
what constitutes good farmland and make
sure he gets it.
A recent newspaper item mentioned that in
some parts of Africa, today, it takes eight
people to grow enough food crops to feed
nine people. Fortunately, good farming
methods are spreading across the world
along with good farming machinery, and

modern fertilizers can do wonders with
poor land. Yet when the same eight dirtscratchers are turned into eight tractor
drivers planting pedigreed seed, and their
labor

feeds

eight

hundred

or

eight

thousand – still, first, their minds will have
to accept the idea that this has been done
by others and that they can do it. Wealth
ALWAYS begins in the mind.
Wealth always begins with a mind-concept
of wealth-potential. Putting farms aside,
you can trace any fortune back to this one
principle.
When you seek enough, therefore, look
first into the mind that interprets the world
around it. It is in your mind that you not only
conceive the kind and amount of wealth
you want; it is also in your mind that you

take the raw stuff of circumstance and
make it into opportunity.
Peace of mind is wealth. I have not made
the above statement before in exactly
those words, but I am sure they do not
surprise you.
The principle is so important that I shall
give you yet another story about a man who
was wealthy in money but did not know
how poor he was because he did not have
peace of mind. Also, he did not know what
he was missing until he found it. And in
order to find peace of mind, he had to
abandon

a

business

principle

and

substitute a human-kindness principle
which he always had sneered at – so you
can see, this shapes up into a pretty
important true story.

The hero is ... but who is the hero of this
story? You have to decide for yourself. At
any rate, a major character is a man who
had made a fortune in real estate, largely
through the rental of cheap property he
owned. He found one aging couple to be
long in arrears in their rent, and so,
following his invariable principle of "good
business," he decided to evict them.
He told his lawyer to follow through on the
procedure. The lawyer, however, did not
present him with an accomplished eviction,
so the property owner and the lawyer had
a talk. The lawyer said "I shan't press your
claim. You can get someone else to take
the case, unless you'd rather withdraw it."
The property owner decided he knew what
was on the lawyer's mind. "So you think
there isn't any money in it?" "Oh, there'd be

some little money in it, since I understand
you want to sell the house once it's empty.
But I don't want the case anyway."
The property owner wondered what was
going on. "Did you get frightened out of it?"
"No, not at all."
"Ah-ha! Then the old coot who doesn't pay
his rent begged to be let off." "Well, yes."
"And you softened? He begged you and
you went mushy?
That's a terrible way to do business. Why,
if he'd tried that on me, I'd have -"
"He didn't beg me to let him off. He didn't
say a word to me."
"Well, he certainly didn't beg me, so may I
respectfully inquire to whom he did address
himself?"

The lawyer said quietly "He addressed
himself to God Almighty."
"So he fell on his knees when you asked for
the rent and he -"
"No. He didn't know I was there. It wasn't
for my benefit. You see, I knocked on the
door and nobody answered. The door was
ajar. I thought the old couple might have left
already, so I walked in. The place is pretty
bare, and I found myself looking through a
half-open door into a bedroom where a
white-haired old woman was propped up in
bed, on pillows. I was just about to clear my
throat – let her know I'd come in when she
said to someone else in the room 'I'm
ready now. You go ahead, Pa.'
"A man who was very old came from the
other end of the room and knelt beside the

bed. I couldn't move or say a word then, for
the life of me. And that old man prayed,
with his hand in the old woman's hand.
First, he reminded God that they still were
His submissive children, Ma and he, and no
matter what He saw fit to bring upon them,
they wouldn't rebel at His will. But it was
going to be hard for them to be homeless
in their old age, with Ma so sick and
helpless, and, oh! how different it might
have been if He had spared only one of
their three sons, but the boys were no
longer on this earth ..."
The lawyer wiped at his eyes. "I cried then,"
he said, "but I still kept very quiet. And I
listened to him remind the Lord about the
safety of those who put their trust in the
Lord, and how it wasn't going to be
pleasant to go to the alms house after a life

of living together in a home of their own.
And yet, he told the Lord, he knew there is
such a thing as a just bargain with one's
neighbor, and he ended by asking the
Lord's blessing on ..." The lawyer choked
up.
"Not on me!" the property owner said
hoarsely.
"Well, he mentioned no name. But he
prayed for the Lord's blessing on those who
are about to demand their just due. Well ...
I tiptoed out. And that is the end of that case
so far as I am concerned. I'd rather go to
the poorhouse myself than evict that old
couple." He seized the other man's arm.
"Look! I'll pay their back rent myself, right
now, if you'll let them stay in that house."

"No," the property owner said. He rose and
walked to a window. After a moment he too
dabbed at his eyes. "I'll let them stay there
as long as they wish." He turned and said
ruefully, "I wish you hadn't listened to that
petition not intended for your ears or mine."
The lawyer shook his head. "No, it was
intended that I hear it and tell it to you. My
oId mother used to sing about God's
moving in a mysterious way...."
"I've heard that too," the property owner
said. He twisted the claim papers in his
hands, then tore them up. "Well, why don't
you go over there in the morning and-uhtake this ten-dollar bill and bring them a
basket of groceries."
"I'll match that ten and bring them a bigger
basket."

"And-uh-just tell them the rent has been
paid, will you?"
"Yes. Paid in a mysterious way." The two
men smiled at each other.
This real estate owner dates his wealth
from the day he broke the pattern of his life
– the day he stopped grasping and started
giving – the day when he felt the first
stirrings of what came to be a wonderful
peace of mind.
Do not limit what you give, limit what
you take. Of course, practically speaking,
there is a limit to what one can give of his
time and his resources. I have mentioned
that your first duty is to help yourself, then
help other people, and when this rule is
applied correctly it still works wonders.

So when I say Do not limit what you give, I
mean there should be no limit on the spirit
of your giving. The property owner, for
example, had given charity before. But it
was charity given as charity, to local
causes which gratefully acknowledged his
name – so it was good publicity for him and
for his business.
One day he gave when the last thing he
had counted on was giving – and that made
the difference. One day he felt that
something bigger than himself was working
through his wallet – and that made all the
difference in the world. It changed the
entire spirit of his life from that day on.
I make a speech. This subhead is about as
much news as "Dog Bites Man," for I have
made

a

great

many

speeches.

Its

significance is this I made the speech at a

small college, and while I was at the
college, I made a good many notes on
some of their activities in the work andstudy area.
When the chairman of the meeting handed
me my fee, I handed it back. I thanked him
but said I had gathered enough material for
two or more articles in my Golden Rule
magazine, so I felt more than amply paid.
Later, subscriptions to Golden Rule poured
in from the neighborhood of that college.
The students had decided that since I had
done something for them, they would do
something for me, so they had gathered
those subscriptions. I was paid many times
over. And so it goes!
What is the Golden Rule – really? Do you
know that the Golden Rule in one form or

another was old already at the time of
Jesus? He gave it to us in the form most of
us know, but here are a few versions which
go further back in history
He sought for others the good he desired
for himself. [Inscription on an Egyptian
tomb, about  B.C.]
What you would not want done to yourself,
do not do unto others. [Confucius]
We should behave to the world as we wish
the world to behave to us. [Aristotle]
You can see that the Golden Rule has been
set up for quite a few thousand years as a
major

rule

of

conduct

among

men.

Unfortunately, the world remembers the
letter of the rule while too often missing the
spirit of this Universal Injunction.

Say it this way and you are more likely to
associate it with the kind of conduct that
helps both you and others
The Golden Rule means we should do unto
others as we would wish them to do unto
us if our positions were reversed.
Think about that. It is not quite the Golden
Rule you will find in the Bible. It goes
another long step, for it implies your judging
the other fellow's needs in his terms,
seeing the world through his eyes.
Forgive a bit of levity in the middle of a
serious subject, but it can help you
remember. There is an old story about a
missionary who spread the Word among
the primitive inhabitants of a South Sea
island. Among other things he taught them
his version of the Golden Rule, which is the

general version Do unto others as you
would have them do unto you. The chief of
the tribe was greatly impressed. One day
he knocked at the missionary's door and
announced he had brought the missionary
a present ... six extra wives!
Apply the lesson seriously and you will see
that the real goodness of giving lies in
giving the other fellow what he needs.
It is this kind of giving which so fully
accords with the Law of Compensation,
and which accords with so much plain
human experience that shows giving
comes before receiving when the giving
really fills a need.
There is no point in repeating the many
examples of such giving I have shown you
in this book. If you will check back on a few

such examples you will see the Golden
Rule in action. Also you will see its
connection with another famous saying
from the Bible Whatsoever a man soweth
that shall he also reap.
We should not content ourselves with the
merest crumbs from life's table, and we
should not attempt to grab too much. The
Golden Rule often seems to act as a great
leveler in assuring that this shall be so. It
creates an ever-present spirit of kindly
consideration for the needs and rights of
others, so that without thought of gain
(which so often is twisted by small minds
into grabbing) the mind infused with the
Golden Rule acquires a sense of what
constitutes its own true ability to give.
Giving begets receiving; there is a to-andfro passage of wealth which may not reflect

itself in a swollen bank account but does
reflect itself in a mind which has known
such wealth. In this lies happiness, peace
and health which a man merely rich in
money may never know.
A

suggestion

Look

around

in your

community and find some man who you
know lives for the purpose of accumulating
money. Find some man – and alas, you can
find such men – for whom any amount of
money is too little, and no amount is too
much. He will almost certainly be a man
who has little conscience about how he
acquires his money, for conscience can be
a hindrance when your horizon is nothing
but a line of empty money bags to be filled.
Observe this man. Look for warmth in his
soul; you will not find it, unless the subject
of discussion is money. Watch for a warm,

human welcome in his smile; you will not
see it – he smiles like a shark. Notice how
little he displays an enjoyment of life. Oh,
he may go through various expensive
motions of enjoyment, but that is something
else again.
In the humane sense of the word, such a
man is not really human. He is an
automaton – a money-making machine.
Yet many will envy that mechanical man.
They will point to what they call his
success.
Can there be success without happiness?
Any really human person knows the two
must go together as partners in a
worthwhile life. No man who thinks that
happiness lies in having too much ever will
be happy. No man can be truly happy until
he translates the words of the Golden Rule

into deeds, and shares happiness with
others. Moreover, the Golden Rule was not
meant to be enforced like taxes. The
sharing of happiness brings happiness
when the sharing is voluntary, with no other
object than to give.
How much is too little pay? How much is
too much? One of the reasons I have been
glad that my name is not associated with
Big Business – as it almost was – is this,
which I say again I have always felt free to
point out that Big Business should share
more generously with its employees, both
in opportunities and in profits.
Galley slaves of times past were chained to
their oars. They were fed just enough to
keep them going. As you may read in that
stirring tale Ben Hur, when a galley was on
the point of sinking, nobody unchained the

men at the oars. They went down with the
ship as though they were so much
machinery. In spirit, that is all they were.
Labor conditions in the first century or more
of

the

Industrial

Revolution

were

reminiscent of that philosophy. The owner
of an enterprise took from his workers all
he could squeeze out of them and gave
them as little as he could. A good deal of
this approach still persisted in my younger
days. I count it a blessing that I have lived
to see some spirit of sharing enter the world
of the factory and the office. Now we look
back in horror at the twelve-or fourteenhour day worked at starvation wages and
wonder how we could have been so stupid
as not to see how this hurt both man and
his society; but that is the way it was.

Today, reward for work often comes in
"fringe benefits" as well as in direct
payment. The question of – How much is
too little pay? How much is too much? – still
remains, and I dare say always will be with
us. It is not to be treated as an absolute, for
the value of money keeps changing.
By and large, however, one great absolute
remains Within the context of his times, a
man's services are worth as much as he
gives. Most men of fifty or more years of
age can look back upon their pattern of
income from jobs and see that this is so.
Moreover, we instinctively know this, and
we show we know it. I cherish a story told
me by Henry Ford which illustrates the
point beautifully.

During the early days of the business which
is now so big, Mr. Ford advertised for a
general sales manager. He weeded out the
applications and interviewed some of the
more promising prospects. In talking to one
man, he finally got down to discussing
salary. They did not seem able to fix a sum,
so Mr. Ford said "Suppose you come in
and show us what you can do for a month,
then we'll pay you all you are worth."
“No," said the applicant, "'I'm getting more
than that where I work now."
"And," Mr. Ford chuckled, "subsequent
events proved that with his slip of the
tongue he spoke the truth. At the end of the
first month, we had to fire him."
I do not know why Mr. Ford hired the man,
but presumably he appeared to have the

experience and other qualities needed for
the job. Then it turned out that the
appearance of giving was all he had to give
– and the reward was commensurate.
You cannot fake the Golden Rule. Does the
Golden Rule, then, apply even in cases of
hiring and firing? I shall not say this is
invariably the case, but on the long average
– yes, it does apply. The Law of
Compensation, with which the Golden Rule
works hand in hand, applies to every form
of compensation. The advisability of not
settling for too little and not grabbing for too
much also applies. There is no valid rule of
life which stands alone.
Do not think you ever can fake the Golden
Rule. It will avail you nothing to appear to
give what someone else wants, while at

heart you are covering up a dishonest and
selfish nature. Emerson said
Human character does evermore publish
itself. It will not be concealed ... it rushes
into light ... I heard an experienced
counselor say that he never feared the
effect upon a jury of a lawyer who does not
believe in his heart that his client ought to
have a verdict. If he does not believe it, his
unbelief will appear to the jury ... and will
become their disbelief. ... That which we do
not believe we cannot adequately say,
though we may repeat the words ever so
often....
A man passes for what he is worth. What
he is engraves itself on his face, on his
form, on his fortunes, in letters of light
which all men may read but himself. Every
violation of truth is not only a sort of suicide

in the liar but is a stab at the health of
human society.... Trust men and they will
make it their business to trust you; treat
them greatly and they will show themselves
great.
You now have read the Supreme Secret in
many different ways. You will have no
difficulty in accepting it as a proved and
valued guide to peace of mind and wealth
in great measure.
Checking on  
What constitutes abundance?
Many a farmer's land gives him the
potential for abundance, but he remains
poor because he does not realize that
potential. Every man has the potential for
abundance within himself, but he may
remain poor. Wealth comes when you see

your potential for wealth – when you first
conceive in your mind how you can turn the
raw stuff of circumstance into wealthbuilding opportunity.
Peace of mind is wealth
Peace of mind evades many a man who
thinks he is wealthy but is not. When he
finds peace of mind, he knows what he has
missed, and his life is changed from that
day on. Peace of mind often comes at last
when a man discovers how to give without
planning to give; how to give when the
need is evident and without thought of gain.
There has to be a limit on physical giving,
but the spirit of giving knows no limit.
What is the Golden Rule?
See the Golden Rule as a way of helping
others as you would wish them to help you

if your positions were reversed. This
focuses your attention on what the other
fellow needs and results in true human
consideration. The Golden Rule acts as a
great leveler in assuring that you will have
not too little and not too much, but that
great wealth will nevertheless pass through
your hands. Nobody who lives only to
accumulate money can know happiness,
and there is no real success unless one is
successful in being happy.

  The Magic Power of Belief
In the power of belief lies the Supreme
Secret. Belief is the key to basic mindpower which turns concepts into realities.
Goals can be attained in ways which seem
miraculous, yet we use only natural forces
available to everyone. Even physical
changes in the body can be caused by
deeply implanted belief. The key to having
quantities of money often lies in a simple
process of auto-suggestion. Concentrate
on precisely what you want, and you will
see signposts that point the way. The
forces of human evolution now have been
brought under human control, and you can
control your own evolution as a better,
more successful person.
ANYTHING the human mind can believe;
the human mind can achieve.

Please read that again, slowly Anything
the human mind can believe, the human
mind can achieve.
If you had been presented with that
statement at the beginning of this book, you
might have found it a bit too much to digest
all at once.
By now, however, you have seen many of
the patterns of success and failure, of
happiness and unhappiness, of mind
turmoil and peace of mind which man gives
to himself.
Now, when you read Anything the human
mind can believe, the human mind can
achieve, you know that the conception of
achievement,

which

turns

into

the

achievement itself, is our great human
prerogative.

Anything the human mind can believe; the
human mind can achieve. That is the
Supreme Secret.
Truly, deeply believe you will have great
wealth, and you will have it.
Truly, deeply believe you will have sound
physical health, and you will have it.
Truly, deeply believe you will have a mind
at peace, and you will have it – and all the
wonders that go with it.
Anything the human mind can believe; the
human mind can achieve. This is the secret
known in bygone times; this is the secret
which

governs

present-day

accomplishment; this is the secret which
will follow man to the stars. This is the
secret of the ages.

What do we mean by BELIEVE? "Wishing
won't make it so," runs an old saying. This
is true, and helps you remember a wish is
not a belief.
A wish takes place, as it were, upon the
surface of the mind. I wish, you may say,
and follow with any wish that tickles your
fancy ... to have a million dollars drop into
your lap ... to be able to flap your arms and
fly. A wish is not limited by natural forces.
That very apparent fact, however, is not the
main difference between a wish and a
belief.
A belief is created, as it were, in the depths
of the mind. A belief becomes part of you.
That is why a true, deep belief can change
your glandular secretions and the content
of your bloodstream and work other
physical changes beyond the power of

medical science to explain. Again, a belief,
radiating its unknown wave length from the
depths of your mind to the depths of
another mind, accounts for a good deal of
"personality power" and much else on
which we can put only the clumsiest of
labels. It is belief in a cause – much
stronger than a wish to stay alive – which
causes people to transcend even the
instinct of self-preservation. It is belief that
founds religion, sustains nations, stands
behind

anything

great

that

ever

is

achieved. A belief, I repeat, is part of you;
that is why you can achieve what you
believe. Moreover, when you hold a great
belief you believe all the time, just as, all
the time, you go on living.
Conscious

and

subconscious.

As

someone expressed it, the conscious mind

gives us "thoughts we know." You want to
put on your shoes, for example, or listen to
the radio, and knowing the conscious
thought, you take the appropriate action.
Now, there is hardly any physical reason
why one should not put on his shoes or tum
on his radio if he wishes to do so and has
the use of his hands. But let us now
suppose that there may be some reason
not to tum on that radio. Suppose it is the
moment
broadcast

at

which

may

be

a

certain

heard,

foreign

and your

government, an oppressive one, has set up
punishments for people who listen to that
broadcast. Moreover, you know you cannot
listen to that broadcast in complete safety,
for you suspect there are spies in your
house.

Do you or do you not reach out and tum the
switch that will bring in the forbidden
broadcast? That will depend a great deal
upon your subconscious mind. It is not in
the conscious mind that we are basically
fearful or brave, but down deeper. And so
the

subconscious

will

instruct

the

conscious, unknown to you, and in the
conscious will appear the thought known to
you
Don't do it, you'll end in prison! or I'm going
to assert my freedom to listen to what I
want to hear, under any circumstances, or
even a compromise such as I'm going to
see if that nosy fellow in the furnished room
upstairs is at home, and if he isn't, I'll turn
on the radio.
Take this a step farther. Suppose you say
in your conscious mind – I am going to turn

on that radio at  PM no matter what! But
you wish it, rather than believe it, while all
the time, in your subconscious, dwells a
fear which amounts to a direction that you
will not tum on the radio. Now the
subconscious mind will feed all kinds of
evasions and excuses to the conscious.
You will somehow manage to come home
late, or you will rush into the house just in
time and "accidentally" bang into the radio,
knock it off the table and smash it. (An
honest enough accident, since you will
consciously believe it was accidental). Or
you may make an appointment to do
something

else at

the

time

of

the

broadcast, and then suddenly remember –
when your subconscious allows you to
remember consciously – that this is the

broadcast time, and how silly of you to have
committed yourself to another obligation.
Do not read any implication of dishonesty
into all this, nor any implication that no
consideration should be stronger than
one's right to turn on one's radio. Look at it
broadly. See that your subconscious mind
is your hidden boss.
You probably have recognized this many a
time when you have said there is
something you simply will not do; it is
against your principles. A true principle is a
firm belief that is part of you and can of
course be a very useful and necessary
thing.
Your subconscious mind is your hidden
boss, then, and gives orders to your
conscious. But your subconscious, as you

surely know by reading this book, is a very
special kind of boss. It will go into
conference with you, so to speak, and
consider changing any of its standing
orders, canceling them, substituting others
if need be.
Decide upon the belief you want, set it
firmly into your subconscious mind, and
your subconscious will thereafter instruct
your conscious mind to "live up to" that
belief.
Let your belief include the concept of
achievement and your subconscious mind
will discover ways and means toward that
achievement which, on the strength of a
mere wish, would completely escape you.
You may talk of "good fortune" and "lucky
breaks,"

but

what

you

mean

is

a

sharpening of all your senses toward the

achievement you want – a focusing of all
your forces away from other matters and
toward that achievement – a mighty access
of strength and resourcefulness – a tuning
in upon other minds whose aid otherwise
would have escaped you – and more! The
best of words limp when they talk of the
power of belief. Only feel your belief
propelling you toward the goal of your
achievement and you will know at last that
an irresistible force is at your command.
Is there a limit to what belief can
achieve? If there is a limit, nobody has
seen that limit yet. I have mentioned often
that we may at times avail ourselves of
powers beyond our ordinary senses. (Not
supernatural, but natural powers we are
only beginning to understand.} Deep

subconscious

belief

aids

mightily

in

winning the aid of these unseen powers.
Once, when I was a child, I had typhoid
fever – the only serious illness I ever had
had. I was ill for weeks without showing any
sign of improvement. At length, as my
father informed me years later, I lapsed into
a coma. The two doctors who had come out
to our farm told my father there was nothing
else they could do; my end was only a few
hours away.
My father walked into the forest. There he
knelt down and prayed to another Doctor
beyond earthly doctors. With his prayer he
generated a mighty, all-embracing belief
that I would recover. He remained on his
knees for an hour or more, and at length a
great peace came over him . . . that peace
of mind which is the condition in which the

mind works at its mighty best. And
suddenly, from nowhere, and yet beyond
the slightest shadow of doubt, he knew
peacefully that I was going to recover.
I do not know where my father's prayer
might have been heard, nor if it was heard,
nor if the mere fact of the prayer gave him
the focusing and intensifying agent which is
part of deep subconscious belief. But I
know that when he returned to the house,
he found me sitting up, which had been
impossible for me to do a couple of hours
before. Sitting up, crying for water, and with
my fever "broken" as we used to say.
Another generation, another goal. I have
been privileged to see in my own
generation, and with my own son, how
deep

belief

achievement.

can

bring

"impossible"

When my son Blair was born without ears,
and without many vital parts of the usual
hearing equipment, I conceived the idea
that he would hear. Let me make short
shrift of the obstacles that were put in
Blair's way and mine – the denunciations I
received for not allowing him to learn
finger-talk, the attempts to wreck his life by
making him self-conscious about being
"different," and so forth. At any rate, I knew
that the subconscious mind can work
wonders toward establishing health and
proper function in the body – when it is so
conditioned.
The conscious mind often serves as a sort
of sentinel which guards the entrance to the
subconscious. Thus, as we say, "A man
convinced against his will is of the same
opinion still," because his agreement was

merely conscious, perhaps a peacemaker
rather than a subconscious "change of
orders." Or in extraordinary circumstances
we are "carried away" and do not act in our
accustomed manner, but later return to our
ordinary ways of conducting ourselves
because no deep-down impression was
made.
Hypnotism

appears

to

bypass

the

conscious mind at sometimes, and with
some people. There is a better and less
risky way, however, to reach past the
barrier of the conscious and implant
instructions in the subconscious, where
they will be absorbed and fed back. That
way is to give instructions to a sleeping
person. The conscious mind sleeps, but the
subconscious does not sleep. Recent
studies suggest that there are certain

stages of sleep in which the mind is more
receptive than when it is in other stages,
and I am glad to see this modem
investigation of the technique. I may have
wasted some of my efforts, but my efforts
were so long-continued and backed by
such belief that they achieved what many
others said I never would be able to do.
I spoke to Blair while he slept. I spoke
directly to his subconscious mind and told
it what I expected of it. He received added
stimulation of his nervous system through
chiropractic adjustments.
With this method I induced nature to build
an extra set of auditory nerves from Blair's
brain to the inner walls of his skull. Now, he
did not grow ears, but he achieved ability to
hear equivalent to about  per cent of the
normal level, and with that he got along

quite well. Some may call this a miracle of
healing, but I would rather call it a
demonstration of the power of natural
forces.
Just how does Blair hear? Through bone
conduction to those new nerves inside his
skull. Now we know that some of the
marvelous new transistorized hearing aids
depend on bone conduction.
Can the method be extended? My
method worked, but it required that some
devoted person remain on duty many hours
a night. Later I experimented with a
phonograph which repeated a recorded
message every fifteen minutes, piping it to
a hearing device beneath the sleeping
person's pillow. I myself have received
great benefit from this device.

We know, too, that corresponding devices
are sometimes offered for sale. These
devices have been benefited by modem
developments in sound recording and
transmission, but their principle is the
same. Concurrently I have become aware
of other recent research into the techniques
of sleep-learning which suggests some of
the difficulties people may encounter
First of all, the machine alone is not
enough. First there must be belief that the
subconscious mind can and will receive
messages while the conscious is asleep. A
skeptical mind may make nothing of the
messages. A mind filled with fear and
inferiority, or both, will soon decide the
"gadget" is too much trouble to use.
Then too, some people have their sleep so
disturbed by the mere existence of a

machine

at

their

bedside

that

their

conscious minds never really go out of
action. Probably they could condition
themselves to sleeping, machine or no
machine, but I suspect that most such
people are more anxious to return the
machine within the time limit of its
guarantee!
Many people also seem to go to lengths to
negate any benefit they may obtain through
sleep-learning.

The

subconsciously

recorded message needs time in which to
take root, so to speak, in the myriad cells of
the mind. It will not do this if the conscious
mind is allowed, even encouraged, to use
its waking hours to throw in negative
thoughts – the memory of a past failure, for
instance, or over-concern with what other

people will think of some course of action,
or whatever.
And finally, I discovered this The recorded
messages must be reinforced when the
individual is in a conscious, wide awake
state. He should memorize the recorded
messages which, of course, have no
concern with anything but what is to be
achieved, and carry no clutter of imagined
handicaps.

He

should

repeat

these

completely positive, focused messages to
himself many times a day so that his
conscious mind becomes accustomed to
them, and through repetitive conditioning
can talk to his subconscious.
Eventually, sleep-learning may be so
perfected as to open great new worlds of
achievement. It may help you greatly right
now, but I wish rather to mention it as an

illustration of the way in which the
subconscious can and will accept orders
which forever after guide you, and may, as
I have shown, even cause marvelous
changes in the body.
This book emphasizes the fact that each of
us carries within himself the means of
finding his own greatness. Knowing the
Supreme Secret – what the human mind
can believe, the human mind can achieve
– you see that you have what it takes – your
mind – and you have available the only
other ingredient you need ... a world that is
bursting with riches and throbbing with
opportunity. Put the two together.
The art of auto-suggestion. There is a
man in Cleveland today who is worth about
ten million dollars. He made his money first
by putting TV sets into supermarkets, thus

reaching shoppers with special programs
he broadcast to them at the point of
purchase. This did not require any new
inventions nor the instilling of a new way of
life into millions of people. It did not even
require a head start by way of great capital
or special position, for this man – his name
is Art Modell – began as a shipyard worker.
He conceived an idea and brought it
upward and onward into achievement.
A man named McVicker, from Cincinnati, is
quoted as saying "You have got to believe
so strongly ... that you overcome the
doubts of others." He believed that a
doughy material used to clean wallpaper
would appeal to children – and their
parents – as a non-sticky modeling
material. Others told him he was wrong. He

achieved a business worth about four
million dollars a year.
Like Henry Ford or Thomas Edison, these
successful men of today believed and
achieved. Their belief showed them the
way to their achievement. So it was with
Columbus. So it was with Paul of Tarsus.
So it can be with you. The art of autosuggestion is completely self-contained.
We shall see it clearly, in plain print, in a
moment. First ask yourself What do I
want? This is not a question to be
answered lightly. What do you want? Once
more I give you a list to aid your thinking
•

Improvement of your general health

•

Improvement of some specific health

or functional factor
•

Cure of any bad habit

•

Abolishment of fear

•

The ability to transmute sex energy

•

The ability to find the right mate in

marriage
•

Weight reduction or gain

•

The ability to break away from

outworn customs or outmoded ways of life
•

The ability to get along better with

other people
•

The ability to sway others to your way

of thinking
•

Inner guidance in the selection of a

business or profession
•

Money

When you know what you want, you are
ready to go after it. You need a Definite
Chief Aim. Vague mind-conceptions are
little better than mere wishes. Decide
where you are going then, and only then do

you begin to see the signposts that point
the way.
You are going to make money, and I trust
you to see it as only one form of wealth –
but, as I have pointed out, a form of wealth
which helps us attain many others. The
chances are that you automatically accept
money as a goal, so let us take this goal as
a prototype in illustrating auto-suggestion.
How much money do you want to make?
You will recall the stories of W. Clement
Stone and other men who set up specific
sums of money as their goal and attained
the ownership of those sums. They did not
fill their minds with thoughts of the
difficulties in their way, nor the menace of
competition. They believed they would
make money ... they achieved what they
went after. Now, this is the way to use auto-

suggestion to help you achieve the sum of
money you want. It is done in six steps
which stimulate your subconscious mind
One Find a quiet spot where you can be
alone and undisturbed. Many find that as
they lie in bed, just before going to sleep,
the mind becomes receptive. Close your
eyes and repeat aloud, listening to your
own words, the sum of money you intend
to make – the time limit you have set for its
accumulation – and a description of the
service or merchandise you intend to give
or to sell in return for that money.
Two Put the same words in writing. (You
may do this first if you wish). Write it out
carefully and in detail. Memorize it. When
you go into your quiet place to repeat your
goal to yourself, say it word for word as you
have written it. You may change it here and

there until it is absolutely specific. Add a
statement of this nature, in your own words
I believe that I will have this money in my
possession. My belief is so strong that I
now can see the money before my eyes. I
am holding it in my hands. I know it exists,
and it is awaiting transfer to me in return for
my services rendered with full honesty and
all possible skill and diligence. A plan exists
which will transfer this sum [state the sum]
to me by [state the deadline date] and my
receptive mind will see that plan and cause
me to follow it.
See yourself rendering the service or
delivering the merchandise. See yourself
receiving your payment. This is important!
Three Place a written copy of your
statement where you will see it night and

morning. Read it upon rising. Read it again
just before retiring. You may also carry it
with you and read it several times a day,
but to read it first thing in the morning and
last thing at night is particularly important.
Again, as you read, see yourself going
through the actions which will bring you the
money. Feel the money in your hands. Feel
with feeling. Merely reading the words (or
saying them to yourself) will mean nothing
unless they carry the emotional charge of
desire.

It

is

well

known

that

the

subconscious has less regard for reason
than it does for emotion.
Four Put the Master Mind Principle to
work. It is not always possible to form a
Master Mind group according to the
directions you have read in a previous
chapter – and you are better off without one

than doing it the wrong way. You can,
however, make good use of the principle by
conferring with the right people. These are
people who can help you and, if possible,
people you can help. Don't forget, if you
want to see a banker about financing your
business, you are helping him run his
business. (And don't forget, many a "coldblooded" banker has been swayed by the
confidence and belief and enthusiasm he
sees in a would-be borrower – with good
reason).
The more people you talk to, the more
information you will receive. The more they
know – the more you know. Choose the
right people, however. Now and again you
will meet, among them, one whose mind
tunes in to yours. Speaking with such a
person

is

a

mighty

tonic

for

the

subconscious drives you have at your
direction.
Five When your plan appears, act upon it.
You will know it. The subconscious is like a
fertile garden spot in which any seed will
grow, be it the seed of a weed or the seed
of your fortune. Through auto-suggestion
you work wonders in keeping out the weed
seeds. When a seed of your fortune falls in
the garden of your subconscious, however,
it grows in relation to the attention you give
it.
Do not sit idly waiting for your plan to
appear. You may not precisely know, for
example, where you are going to set up
your business – but until the right place
draws your attuned attention, you can be
contacting sources of supply, learning
more about the business and filling your

mind with the process of your achievement
in a hundred other ways. Remember how
publishers came to me when I needed
them.
Six Once you have a matured plan which
covers every detail, put that plan in writing.
Read it over night and morning. Stick to it
but be ready to change it if circumstances
point out the advisability of a change. Your
mind will not constantly flutter from one
alternative to another. Your subconscious
will sift the alternatives with a great power
to show you what you must do to attain
your goal.
I could set down Faith as a seventh factor
of

auto-suggestion;

but

faith

is

all-

pervasive. Faith is called, in another of my
books, the head chemist of the mind. As
faith blends with thought, it becomes the

perfect ingredient for true subconscious
belief. As faith becomes part of you, it rides
along with every message you repeat to
yourself. It becomes part of your character,
part of your personality. Faith helps you
emotionalize your thoughts, bring them
beyond the power of reason into another
realm of mental being where thoughts
become their physical equivalent.
Now, with a sense of faith, read the six
steps of auto-suggestion over again.
A new look at your mind and your body.
The Supreme Secret is Anything the
human mind can believe; the human mind
can achieve. It would be as valid to say
Anything the mind can believe, the mind
can achieve, but I wish to emphasize the
power of the human mind. No other living
creature can take hold of its mind as we do,

sense and explore its powers, find ways to
increase those powers to an extent almost
beyond imagination.
You are used to being human. Take time
now and then to realize the uniqueness of
your human state.
One of the great modern commentators on
man and his mind is Dr. Pierre Lecomte du
Nouy. I have a favorite passage from his
great book, Human Destiny, which I am
fond of showing to people who cannot see
how it is possible for the mind to heal the
body. I quote this passage now
The human body is constituted of distinct
beings, the cells, each endowed with totally
different properties. There are the common
and prolific plebeians, the fibroblasts; there
are the independent chemists of the liver

and the marrow; there are the chemists
who obey the orders transmitted by the
brain and the nervous system, and who
know how to manufacture instantaneously,
at the tip of the nerves, acetylcholine which
contracts the muscles and adrenalin which
decontracts them. There are the noble
cells, the pyramidal cells of the brain, living
in proud sterility and never reproducing
themselves; there are the nervous cells
which transmit orders and reactions; there
are those which defend, those that protect,
those which heal. From the coordination of
the

whole

emerges

the

autonomous

personality of man.
And this brief description barely touches
upon the stupendous group of factors
available to man in his body and brain, for

the organization, projection and use of the
power of thought.
It is a major indictment against the world's
educational systems that most people
come into this world, live their span of years
and pass on without being made aware of
their thought-power and the fact that their
lives are made or unmade by this thoughtpower. Worse yet, we are taught all kinds
of things and yet rarely taught to use our
minds for the attainment of the one
indispensable form of wealth – peace of
mind.
It is a major indictment against the
religionists that they seem to have learned
so much about how to prepare to live in
Heaven – but have done so little about
preparing

us

to

live

prosperously,

peaceably and happily here, now.

It is a major indictment against our
civilization that the vast majority of people
keep most of their thought power centered
on their fears, rather than on conceptions
and deep beliefs which can bring them
what they want – not that of which they are
afraid.
Every man can surpass himself. Dr. du
Nouy points out dramatically the power of
the human being to reach beyond his
limitations and thus forever to extend his
powers
We all have our role to play individually. But
we only play it well on condition of always
trying to do

better,

of

overreaching

ourselves. It is this effort which constitutes
our personal participation in evolution, our
duty.... If we have children, we will have
collaborated in a measure modestly,

statistically, but unless we develop our
personality we will have left no trace in the
true, human evolution. [The italics are
mine.]
Obviously, Dr. du Nouy recognized the
importance of each individual's exercising
his privilege of choice in thinking as a
means of mental and spiritual growth, for
he continues
"An

intelligent

being,"

said

Bergson,

"carries within him the wherewithal to
surpass himself." It is needful for him to
know it, and it is essential for him to attempt
to realize it. The incomparable gift of brain,
with

its

truly

amazing

powers

of

abstraction, has rendered obsolete the
slow and sometimes clumsy mechanisms
utilized by evolution so far. Thanks to the
brain alone, man, in the course of three

generations only, has conquered the realm
of air, while it took hundreds of thousands
of years for animals to achieve the same
result through the process of evolution.
Thanks to the brain alone, the range of our
sensory organs has been increased a
millionfold, far beyond the fondest dreams;
we have brought the moon within thirty
miles of us [du NOUY is a modem writer,
but see how he already needs to be
updated!], we see the infinitely small and
we see the infinitely remote; we hear the
inaudible; we have dwarfed distance and
killed physical time.
We have enslaved the forces of the
universe, even before we have succeeded
in understanding them thoroughly. We
have put to shame the tedious and timeconsuming methods of trial and error used

by nature, because nature has finally
succeeded in producing its masterpiece in
the shape of the human brain. But the great
laws of evolution are still active, even
though adaptation has lost its importance
as far as we are concerned. We are now
responsible for the progress of evolution.
We are free to destroy ourselves if we
misunderstand the

meaning

and the

purpose of our victories; and we are free to
forge ahead, to prolong evolution, to
cooperate with God if we perceive the
meaning of it all, if we realize that it can only
be achieved through a wholehearted effort
toward moral and spiritual development.
Peace of mind and power of mind. Since
what you achieve in life depends on what
you first conceive, and this depends first of
all upon your deep, inner, subconsciously

founded belief – you see that your life
depends upon your power to believe.
No, your mere life-processes do not
depend upon this power. The Eternal has
made

it

possible

for

the

supreme

achievement of evolution, man, to stay
alive even without knowing he is alive. The
beating of the heart, the pumping of the
lungs, the processes of digestion and other
vital functions are taken care of by a part of
the brain which takes care of itself.
Beyond this, man creates an ever better
species. He aspires and climbs to the
heights of his aspiration. Seeing heights yet
beyond, again he aspires – and achieves
that peak, beyond which lies another and
another.

Significantly, philosophers always have
recognized the power of the quiet mind, the
peaceful mind. This is far from being a mind
empty of aspiration. It is, rather, a mind
which can hold, judge and evaluate the
highest forms of aspiration. Nor is a
peaceful mind the exclusive property of a
person who does not move about in the
world and busy himself with the world's
manifold affairs, for some of the most
peaceful

minds

are

the

busiest.

Remember, we speak of inner peace, like
a quiet center about which all else revolves,
like a great rotating dynamo doing useful
work and filled with energy yet referring its
rotation always to the unmoved pivot at its
middle.
A mind at peace is a mind that is free to
conceive greatly. It bears no great conflicts

within its subconscious which may hamper
the

conscious

mind

and

therefore

conscious action. A mind at peace is a free
mind. Its power is limitless.
Form your great beliefs on the basis of
inward peace and they will be truly great –
and they will be possible of achievement.
Not possible to everyone, perhaps, but
possible to the man who knows that peace
of mind and power of mind are the same.
Who told you it couldn't be done? What
great achievement has he to his credit that
entitles him to use the word impossible?
Checking on  
Anything the human mind can believe, the
human mind can achieve
This is the Supreme Secret, forever the
foundation-secret of man's efforts to control

his destiny. Conceive a great step forward
in your life, form a deep subconscious
belief, and the belief becomes the very
foundation of reality. "Wishing won't make
it so," for a mere wish does not penetrate
the depths of the mind; but a true belief
becomes part of your complete being.
Conscious and subconscious
Your subconscious mind is your hidden
boss. Although your conscious mind
controls

your

conscious

actions,

the

subconscious dictates the pattern of those
actions. If, subconsciously, you are afraid
to do something, you may fill in with
excuses and evasions which prevent you
from

taking

that

action.

But

your

subconscious can be persuaded to change
any of its standing orders and thus
completely

change

your

life.

Your

subconscious mind is the seat of deep
belief which becomes your constant guide.
The subconscious knows no limit to its
power
The proper use of the subconscious mind
puts us in touch with forces beyond the
ordinary

senses.

Thoughts

can

be

transmitted to the subconscious mind of a
sleeping person, bypassing the guard of
the conscious mind. This is the secret of
seeming miracles of healing. Methods of
sleep-learning may

eventually

be so

perfected as to open great new horizons of
mental power.
Auto-suggestion and your success
Knowing that what the human mind can
believe, the human mind can achieve, you
can see that deep belief opens great vistas

of opportunity. In order to get what you
want, you must focus your belief on a
Definite Chief Aim. Money is a goal to be
handled with judgment, but it is an
acceptable goal and a definite one.
Techniques of autosuggestion should be
focused on the precise amount of money
you want and the means by which you are
going to attain that sum. Peace of mind and
power of mind go hand in hand, and the
mind at peace is the mind most capable of
great conceptions, great beliefs and the
enjoyment of those beliefs as solid realities.

  Enthusiasm and Something
More
Enthusiasm is the great tool of persuasion.
Ask for a favor with enthusiasm, add
certain psychological factors shown here,
and your request becomes irresistible.
Behind enthusiasm must stand the honest
desire to serve, and a favor done for you
should also benefit the person who does
the favor. When you look for a job, follow
key rules to make sure you get the right job,
with every prospect of rapid advancement.
Make sure you do the kind of work in which
you can express yourself – for it is a long
step toward wealth and peace of mind.
I HAVE been looking at a couple of old
letters. I reproduced them in a book some
time ago, and the comments I have

received make me sure they should be
reproduced again.
The letters were part of a discourse on
Enthusiasm – a discourse I have changed
and improved with the years. I never have
seen reason to change the principle,
however
Enthusiasm is a state of mind that inspires
and arouses one to put ACTION into the
task at hand. It is the most contagious of all
emotions and transmits the impetus toward
agreement and action to all within reach of
your words.
Now I give you the letters exactly as I wrote
them. You may read them and say "Letters
are not written that way anymore." True;
styles change. I hope always to be aware
of that fact. But remember the principle

enunciated above and see which is more
important. the style or the principle. Read
the letters first; then I shall tell you their
history.
My dear Mr.______________
I am just completing a manuscript for a new
book entitled How to Sell Your Services. I
anticipate the sale of several hundred
thousand of these books and I believe
those who purchase the book would
welcome the opportunity of receiving a
message from you as to the best method of
marketing personal services.
Would you, therefore, be good enough to
give me a few minutes of your time by
writing a brief message to be published in
my book?

This will be a big favor to me personally and
I know it would be appreciated by the
readers of the book.
Thanking

you

in

advance

for

any

consideration you may care to show me, I
am, Yours very truly,
My dear Mr. ______________
Would you care to have the opportunity to
send a message of encouragement, and
possibly a word of advice, to a few hundred
thousand of your fellow men who have
failed to make their mark in the world as
successfully as you have done?
I have about completed a manuscript for a
book to be entitled How to Sell Your
Services. The main point made in the book
is that service rendered is cause and the
pay envelope is effect; and that the latter

varies in proportion to the efficiency of the
former. The book would be incomplete
without a few words of advice from a few
men who, like yourself, have come up from
the bottom to enviable positions in the
world. Therefore, if you will write me your
views as to the most essential points to be
borne in mind by those who are offering
personal services for sale, I will pass your
message on through my book. This will
insure its getting into hands where it will do
a world of good for a class of earnest
people who are struggling to find their
places in the world's work.
I know you are a busy man, Mr.___, but
please bear in mind that by simply calling
in your secretary and dictating a brief letter
you will be sending forth an important
message to possibly half a million people.

In money this will not be worth to you the
two-cent stamp that you will place on the
letter, but, if estimated from the viewpoint
of the good it may do others who are less
fortunate than yourself, it may be worth the
difference between success and failure to
many a worthy person who will read your
message, believe in it and be guided by it.
Very cordially yours,
The letters say the same thing ... BUT.
The second letter bears a quiet but definite
enthusiasm, and other factors of mind-tomind suggestion which I shall explain. The
second letter did the trick. Both letters went
to eight or ten men who indeed had made
their mark in the world and indeed were
busy; men such as Henry Ford and
Thomas R. Marshall, at that time VicePresident of the United States. The first

letter brought no replies. The second letter,
written after I had realized my mistake in
writing the first one, brought back replies
from all to whom it was sent. Some of those
replies were masterpieces and served
beyond my fondest hopes as valuable
supplements to my book.
Now,

the first

letter

is

not

entirely

unenthusiastic. But about what? About my
own self-interest. It is true that people often
will respond to a request for a favor – but it
is truer that they will respond when that
favor will in some way benefit themselves
or, in any event, benefit some third party or
parties who seem worthy of such benefit.
Thus, if I were selling scuff-proof shoes (if
there is such a shoe) by mail, I might send
you a letter asking you to do me a favor by
wearing a pair of my shoes for ten days and

seeing if you could scuff them. You would
do this at my risk – but you would see that
if you wore them for ten days and could not
scuff them, you would have done yourself
a favor in discovering such wonderful
shoes. Or, writing to a parent, I might ask
him to do me a favor by taking the X
Encyclopedia into his home for thirty days
and seeing the wonderful effect on his
children's marks in school ... wherein the
favor actually is done for a third party.
Now look at the closing paragraph of the
first

letter.

"Thanking

What

implication

lies

in

you

advance

for

any

in

consideration you may care to show me"?
There is a strong undertone to the effect
that the writer anticipates refusal! Well, why
not refuse? This writer has advanced little
reason for a busy man to take the trouble

to write a letter. The recipient did read that
those who purchased the book would
welcome an opportunity, and so forth, but
that hardly hits home, and it is buried in the
body of the letter.
The entire letter reminds me of a salesman
who once wanted me to subscribe to the
Saturday Evening Post. He held up a copy
of the magazine and said "You wouldn't
subscribe to the Post to help me out, would
you?"
Well, I am the one who wrote the first letter.
At least give me credit for having later
improved it!
Now look at the second letter. Notice that
the first paragraph asks a question – and
the question can be answered in only one
way. The question, moreover, is asked in

such a way as to set up an entire viewpoint
toward the matter at hand.
The reader is now conditioned. The second
paragraph carries him along. It mentions
me and my affairs briefly, but it is mostly
taken up with a statement of fact that will
make him nod his head and know I am
talking his language. Even if he never has
thought in terms of cause and effect, as
regards pay envelopes, he will see the
point as being clear and helpful.
The next paragraph might be said to
contain flattery – or it might be said to
contain nothing but the truth. The men to
whom I wrote had truthfully come up from
the bottom to enviable positions in the
world. Having acknowledged this, I have
taken the reader another step on the
psychological journey which leads straight

toward compliance with my request. Then
comes the request itself – but couched in
terms of service which the reader can
render, because of his qualifications, to a
third party who is worthy of his help.
The closing paragraph tactfully conceals
the suggestion that the reader cannot
refuse a request which costs him (in those
days) a two-cent stamp, especially when
he compares himself with those less
fortunate. The letter hardly could be laid
aside without a feeling of guilt in not
replying. After all, the recipient has been
appealed to in the name of those who will
read your message, believe in it and be
guided by it.
Not only did the letter bring me valuable
answers, but also, with one exception, the
men I addressed replied in person. The

exception was Theodore Roosevelt, who
replied over his secretary's signature. John
Wanamaker and Frank A. Vanderlip wrote
magnificent

replies.

William

Jennings

Bryan and Lord Northcliffe wrote fine
letters, and so did others. Moreover, only
four of the entire group knew me, so surely
the majority of the group did not write to
please

me;

they

wrote

to

please

themselves, knowing they were about to
render a worthy service.
Let me say right here that ten smaller men
might have thrown my letter into their
wastebaskets. The really big men I have
known were notable for their willingness to
render service to others. That may be why
they were really big.

Selling and auto-suggestion. You may
not be in the business of selling – but you
always sell yourself.
You may not believe you have any reason
to persuade anybody else of anything –
and yet, a good deal of your success and
happiness depends upon achieving a
reasonable acceptance of your ideas by
others. Make a little analysis of your affairs
and this will become evident.
You may not see any reason to persuade
yourself of anything – but it is the very
process of self-persuasion which brings on
deep subconscious BELIEF and gives you
command of life's Supreme Secret.
That is why I began this chapter by talking
about enthusiasm. Enthusiasm is the great
vehicle

of

persuasion,

whether

the

persuasion is directed toward another or
toward oneself.
Enthusiasm often amounts to automatic
auto-suggestion. Enthusiasm does not
come from "nowhere," but once it arrives it
seems absolutely to take hold of everything
else.
For many years I did most of my writing at
night. Naturally enough, I would grow tired
after a few hours. One night I was engaged
on a piece of work which filled me with
enthusiasm. After a while I looked out the
window, across Madison Square in New
York City, and noticed the Metropolitan Life
Insurance Company's tower. I saw a
strange, silvery-gray reflection on the
tower. The moon, I thought, but I had never
seen the moon reflected in such an odd
color. It was not a reflection of the moon,

but of the sun! My enthusiasm had kept me
working all night without fatigue. Moreover,
the same enthusiasm kept me working all
through the day and the next night as well,
stopping only for some light food. After that,
with my task completed, I felt normally
tired.
Enthusiasm is a vital force that energizes
all the forces of your mind and body. Make
enthusiasm part of any autosuggestion
process; part of you.
Help other minds to vibrate in harmony
with your own. We have spoken of "mind
radio." I speak now of something which
may be the same, or, if not, is surely akin.
It is the contagiousness of enthusiasm; its
almost magical power to "sell" ideas to
others.

Anyone who has spoken to an audience
has sensed, at times, that he is "getting
over." For a few magical moments his
enthusiasm catches every other mind in
that room or hall, and what he says in those
moments stays with his audience; they
carry it home with them.
Enthusiasm, however, carefully handled, is
the indispensable tool of any salesman. It
brings the two minds – the seller's mind and
the buyer's mind – into rapport, or
harmony. It allows the salesman to transmit
to the buyer a feeling of need for the
product, an appreciation of its worth, a
willingness to part with money for the sake
of making his life more full and happy – a
service in which he sees what the product
will do for him.

What you say is important, of course. No
mere combination of words, however, can
do the work it is supposed to do unless
these words carry the spirit of conviction,
belief, faith, enthusiasm which conveys all
these.
In order to make this point clear, let us look
at what happens when the opposite effect
comes into play. Enthusiasm is perfectly
positive; what happens when a negative
thought is conveyed?
For instance Once I went into an office of
the Dictaphone Company to look at one of
their dictating machines. Even their old
model in those pre-plastic days looked
useful, and I was inclined to agree with the
salesman who pointed out how much it
could help me in my work. I didn't buy,
however. A stenographer at the salesman's

side was transcribing one of his letters from
an old-fashioned shorthand notebook! I
was negatived right out the door.
Or, suppose you are selling anything at all;
let's call it a widget. You sit down with a
prospect and enthusiastically describe to
him how happy the Joneses down the
street are with your company's widget. The
prospect

demurs

advertisement

for

that

he

another

saw

an

company's

widget and it looked like a better product.
At this point, you the salesman may be
tempted to "pan" the other company's
widget. Any salesman I have trained knows
this is a mistake. You cause the prospect
to think negative. You give him a sourness
concerning the entire subject of widgets.
The needing, wanting, buying mood is

replaced by a fearful, let-me-alone mood;
the mind-to-mind contact is lost.
Here is a principle to remember every time
you talk to another person or write to him
and want to sway him your way. When
ideas reach us, either through suggestion
or autosuggestion, they form themselves
into two groups, negative and positive. The
negative

impressions

are

stored

all

together in one memory-bank of the brain,
and the positive impressions are stored in
another memory-bank.
Now, suppose one of your words or
expressions reaches another mind and is
identified as negative. It opens the negative
memory-bank and tends to stir up every
negative memory of a similar nature, as
though you had pulled on just one link of a

chain but, inevitably, dragged all the other
links along with it.
Suppose a stranger asks you to cash a
check. If you never had a check "bounce"
back at you, you may cash the check
without worry. On the other hand, if you
have lost money through cashing checks
for

strangers,

another

request

will

immediately bring up all the doubts and
fears in your memory-bank.
That is why a small negative word, a small
negative thought, even a small and not
logically negative sight (maybe that girl with
the notebook had only just been hired and
had not had time to get used to the
Dictaphone) is enough to set big negative
gears in motion. That is why success of
every kind depends on a positive point of

view ... within yourself and conveyed to
others.
Enthusiasm is the one great emotion which
automatically guarantees that your point of
view will be positive!
Does that mean that you must never
mention a negative matter, never admit you
even

know

about

illness,

poverty,

accidents, war? It does not mean this. We
are well advised to keep negative trends
out

of

our

general

conversation;

to

accentuate the positive, talk on the side we
want to prevail. But reality is reality. Take it
as it stands, when it is negative, and show
a way out! Then your statement, to your
own mind or to another's, carries service,
points the way to a better life.

Perhaps the best illustration is one of the
simplest. An old advertising slogan, still
going strong, is Got a headache? Take X
aspirin. The negative condition is admitted;
the positive, happy way out is immediately
shown. It was not aspirin – of which I used
to take plenty – but peace of mind which
finally rid me of headaches, so I forbear to
name the aspirin makers, but I cannot think
of

a

better

negative-into-positive

transformation than is carried in those six
words. Note the principle Is something
wrong? Here's how to make it right.
Good selling is honest selling. I speak of
selling in the sense of "selling" ideas which
thereupon can be transmuted into reality.
I think back to that memorable moment
when my new stepmother – whom I had
been told to view with suspicion – took me

under the chin and announced that
Napoleon Hill was not a bad boy but a
smart boy whose mind needed only to be
guided. The honest conviction and tender
enthusiasm of those words struck away all
the falsehoods that had been fed into my
young mind. From that moment on I looked
for ways to improve myself; and when I
looked, I found them.
Good selling is honest selling. No
person can afford to express, through
thoughts or acts, that which is not in
harmony with his own belief, for if he does,
he must pay by the loss of his ability to
influence others.
I know it is only when I speak from the heart
that I can persuade an audience to accept
my message.

At one time I might have reaped a
considerable

monetary

advantage

because I was known not to be allied with
Big Business or with any political faction. I
was approached by a representative of a
Latin American government which the
United States at that time refused to
recognize. He wanted me to visit his
country, study its affairs, then write a series
of articles recommending recognition.
I knew, however, I would not be able to
write

with

enthusiasm

and

so

with

conviction. The reason was simple; I did
not believe in the cause. I valued my
integrity more than I valued the money I
would have earned by dipping my pen into
muddy ink.
Read this carefully If you compromise with
your own conscience, you will weaken your

conscience. Soon your conscience will fail
to guide you and you never will have real
wealth based on peace of mind.
When I speak this way, I give you full credit
for being an adult, an intelligent person who
uses his intelligence. You can see that
such precepts, or the same precepts
expressed better by Emerson or other
great thinkers, are not merely "bright
sayings." They are vital laws of life. They
work.
Let me add one more precept to this very
important matter of conveying ideas from
your mind to another's
You cannot afford to suggest to another
person, by word of mouth or in writing, or
through any act, that which you yourself do
not believe.

Surely that is sufficiently straight-from-theshoulder.
Where is your enthusiasm focused?
When you train salesmen, you meet
hundreds of men who may be described
loosely as salesman types. They are first of
all

remarkable

for

their

enthusiasm.

Everything they say has punch behind it.
Every action, even the action of sitting
down, appears to proceed from some
source of inward persuasive energy.
I have seen some of these men succeed
splendidly – and I have seen others fail,
and fail, and give up.
As Emerson said "I learn the wisdom of St.
Bernard, 'Nothing can work me damage
except myself; the harm that I sustain I

carry about with me, and never am a real
sufferer but by my own fault.' "
The trouble with those enthusiastic men
who

failed

was

that

they

were

all

enthusiasm and not much else. The
damage they sustained to their careers
came from their fault in not backing their
enthusiasm with plain, honest knowledge –
with a willingness to go the extra mile – with
a sincere interest in someone besides
themselves.
Over and over, I have seen such men sell
a

product

because

they

simply

overwhelmed the customer with the driving
power of their personalities. They would
come back to the office and boast about the
money they had made that day. Then the
orders would be canceled – or it would turn
out the salesman had forced a purchase

which simply could not be paid for, a fact
which would have been apparent if the
salesman had taken the trouble to listen
and understand.
Enthusiasm needs a focus. The very
existence of the focus makes you have
something besides enthusiasm to offer.
In honest (and successful) selling of
products or services, the focus is the
customer's best interests. Do you wish the
customer to accept, from your mind, the
idea that he must own your product or
service to make his life a better life? Very
well
Be prepared to answer his questions. Know
your product or service inside-out. Know
how he can apply the product to his own
needs. (You can tell him enthusiastically;

but

enthusiasm

is

no

substitute

for

information).
If you make an appointment, be there on
time. Recognize the customer as a man
whose time is valuable. (Your enthusiastic
story of why you were delayed is not an
acceptable substitute).
If you promise service, make sure the
customer gets it. There is no customer like
a repeat customer.
But this is not the course on salesmanship,
so I forbear to give you a list which could
cover a couple of pages. You see the
principle Enthusiasm needs something
solid behind it.
How to focus your enthusiasm when
you apply for a job. Any employer likes to
talk to a man who applies enthusiastically

for a position with his company. The
employer knows that such enthusiasm can
be carried over into the man's work, and
this is a priceless ingredient.
But remember the law of negatives. By the
time a man has given out a few dozen jobs,
he has learned the inadvisability of letting
anyone talk himself into a job when he has
nothing to show but enthusiasm.
A large publishing company has found it
advisable

to

test

applicants'

real

willingness to work by showing them a time
clock. It is explained that nothing is
accepted as a substitute for starting work
on time. This has a remarkable cooling-off
effect on certain fast-talking applicants.
Enthusiasm does often put a man into a
job, or get him bank credit, or make a sale

when the person petitioned feels there is
something behind the enthusiasm. The jobgiver or the bank official may then be willing
to

forego

some

formal

requirement.

Focused enthusiasm, however, is truly
irresistible. Let us see how to focus your
enthusiasm when you apply for a job. We
apply the process to getting a job, but you
will see the many ways in which it can be
applied to other situations.
Prepare a carefully written statement of
reasons why you should have the job. You
may not have been asked to prepare a
resume, but the written statement focuses
the information in your own mind.
State your education. Name the schools
you have attended, the courses you took.
Tell, especially, of your education outside
school, as in night courses. Enlarge on any

kind

of

education

which

particularly

prepared you to handle the job you seek.
State your experience. Give names of
employers, dates of employment. Be sure
to bring out experience which helps to
qualify you in the eyes of the new,
prospective employer.
Give references. Choose them with care.
Choose them, if possible, in relation to what
they can tell the prospective employer
about you as his employee.
State the job you want. Sometimes, when
applying for a job with a large company,
you may not get the job you want because
they are more interested in filling a vacancy
somewhere else. Whether you take the
other job is a matter of judgment.

Nevertheless, focus your enthusiasm on a
particular job when you are an applicant.
State your qualifications for that particular
job. When you focus on the job you want, it
may result in the company "finding" a
vacancy where you want one to exist – or
expanding the staff to include you.
Show you know a good deal about the
prospective employer's business. Do not
do this in a prying way, but show you know
something about the market, sources of
supply and customers, for instance, in his
"trade." An hour or two with that trade's
magazines – available in libraries – can
teach you a great deal.
Offer to go to work on probation. Make it
clear that this offer is based on your
confidence in your ability to fill the needs of

the job, your confidence that you will be
permanently employed once you are given
a chance to show you have what it takes.
(Even this should be put into writing,
whether required or not, to fix it in your
mind).
Now you are ready for your interview –
ready to show enthusiasm that will carry
over into your job. Let us see what you are
ready to show in addition – or already have
shown if you have presented a resume.
You

will

show

that

the

prospective

employer will get a man with some kind of
education. If you have taken night courses,
he will see your education did not stop
when you left school.

You will show you have "been around," and
have learned from experience – the right
kind of experience, from his point of view.
You will show you know what you want –
which heavily implies you are focused
enough to help him get what he wants. You
will show you can see a business as well
as a job. This sets you up as a man who
may be worth promoting.
You will show you want the job enough to
risk being hired on probation – and, of
course, you have faith in yourself.
Now, it is perfectly obvious that you want
the job in order to earn money and further
your other interests in life. But above and
beyond this you have shown that it will be
in the prospective employer's best interest
to hire you. Don't forget that. You are

selling yourself in terms of the other man's
best interests. Look back on the several
points we have mentioned, and you will see
that is what they add up to. Not primarily
SEE WHAT A WONDERFUL PERSON I
AM but SEE HOW MUCH I HAVE TO
OFFER YOU.
The plus of enthusiasm lifts your words
above the level of mere words and changes
them into belief that you are the man for
him!
Very well, you may say, but my written or
spoken resume does not add up to very
much. My education ended in my early
teens, I never took a night course in
anything but playing the guitar ... and so
forth. You have latched onto the negative
feeling that you have nothing to offer.

You have plenty to offer if you believe you
have – and show it!
For example, take the matter of applying for
a particular job. You may not be able to
demonstrate that you already have the
skills you need in order to hold that job –
but you can show you know what the job
requires. You can show you have oriented
yourself to that job. This has a good effect
on employers who are used to paying a
man just for showing up every morning until
he knows what he is doing. Also, where a
company runs a training course, you can
make it very clear that you are willing and
eager to take the training course on your
own time if necessary.
Take the matter of knowing something
about the "line." You do not need education
in order to read trade magazines. To be

able to "talk a man's language" is
surprisingly

impressive.

Any

sensible

interviewer takes school education with a
grain of salt, anyway. With the exception of
jobs which require the holding of particular
degrees, he knows that many a high-grade
job has been filled by a man without a highgrade education ... that is, without a highgrade formal education.
Take the matter of offering to go to work on
probation.

Let

the

interviewer

see

something in you and this may swing the
deal. Offer to put it in writing!
Have I left out such matters as wearing a
clean shirt, a pressed suit and shined
shoes? We are not all like a Barnes
interviewing an Edison, so do not neglect
such matters. I assure you, however, that a

man's clothing often is not noticed when
the man shines through.
Now step back for a broad look! Watch
an artist painting a picture and you may see
that every now and then he steps back to
gain perspective on what he is doing. He
needs a broad look.
I have told you how to apply for a job, in
some detail, while reserving the "broad
look." Take it now. Step back (not
backward, which is something else!) and
see yourself applying for a job and getting
it. Fine. But why did you want that job?
There is the broad look which is highly
essential – as essential as the composition
an artist may sketch for his picture before
he begins to paint.

As I said, it will be obvious to the
prospective employer that you want the job
in order to earn money and to further your
other interests in life. To this end you will
serve yourself by serving him. Very well;
will that job further your other interests in
life?
You can see the tie-in with the Chief Aim
we spoke of a while ago. How will that job
further your Chief Aim in life?
And more How will that job help you fulfill
yourself as a person who can work with joy,
and

so

achievement

work
and

with

effectiveness,

success?

These

questions are important.
Too many men are working in jobs they do
not like. They will give you all kinds of
reasons why they had to take such jobs, or

why they are "stuck" in a job for family
reasons and so forth. They may point to the
money they make and point to the various
elaborate recreations this money makes
possible. But they cannot point honestly to
peace of mind and so they cannot point
honestly to success.
Working hours grow shorter, but still any
man who has a job spends a good portion
of his life at that job. If that portion of your
life is denatured and unhappy, it must have
a degrading effect upon the rest of your
hours and your days. In any event, why let
any part of your life leave you unfulfilled
when it is not necessary? Your work can be
a

grand

fulfillment

when

you

take

perspective on it and see it is right before
you plunge in.

Take these steps before you take a job.
Decide exactly what kind of job you want.
This in itself requires considerable selfanalysis, and if you do not have a Chief
Aim, you will have that fact drawn very
strongly to your attention. Look back
through this book. You are out to live your
own life, to close the door on your past
save as it may benefit you to live without
fear, to win wealth of all kinds ... all this
through the power of your mind and, of
course, through your own efforts. You are
YOU and there is some kind of work that
expresses

YOU

just

as

the

writer

expresses himself in writing, just as the
craftsman expresses himself in the loving
work of his hands. One of the things
America does best is to offer a full range of
occupations for its citizens' free choice.

Everything in our economy helps you find
the job you want; and if the particular job
does not happen to exist, you create it.
Choose the company or person for whom
you wish to work.
Again, there will be many to choose
among. A company's record is generally
public knowledge, worth a bit of trouble in
finding out. An individual's record may also
be public knowledge or may be judged in
many ways, particularly by having known
the individual. Find a company or person
with whom you can cooperate. Find
opportunity as well as a job.
If the person for whom you wish to work is
yourself, give him the same kind of
scrutiny!

Decide what you have to offer. Here a cold
scrutiny may tum up empty spaces. You
may first wish to fill them in, or you may,
with perfect justice, find and be able to
show ways you can compensate for
anything that is lacking until experience fills
it in. At this point, forget about a "job."
Concentrate on what you can give that the
other fellow wants. The Golden Rule will
help you.
Present yourself and your qualifications to
the person who can give you the job. And
this is where we stood a moment ago,
when we decided to step back and gain
perspective. Knowing the job you want,
preparing to get it and getting it are not
separated processes – but they repay a
broad, honest view, each in tum, and when

they are backed by enthusiasm, they
overcome obstacles that stop other men.
Are you enthusiastic about yourself?
Enthusiasm flows contagiously from one
mind to another, and that is how we
generally see it in action. Still – have you
tried being enthusiastic about yourself?
With something behind it?
It can be a good deal of fun, and very
instructive, to take that step back from
yourself, as though stepping out of your
own skin, and then look at the person who
bears your name. When you can feel
enthusiastic about that fellow – fine!
Even if your enthusiasm is based only on
his

evident

promise,

his

belief,

his

willingness – even if not much in the way of
achievement has yet shown itself – fine!

Tune in on his spirit. Weigh his qualities of
giving. Observe how well he succeeds in
doing justice to the powers God gave him.
When you see he is a person you can
appreciate – give him a cheer!
If you hear him making excuses for himself,
shake your finger at him. Tell him that life
reflects back the image we show to life.
You cannot hold a mirror responsible for
the image it reflects.
Does he understand? Does he see that he
is the master of his fate?
Fine! Give him a cheer!
How about it?
Success requires no explanations. Failure
permits no alibis.
Checking on  

Enthusiasm and action
Enthusiasm transmits the impetus toward
agreement and action, whether you sell a
product,

a

service,

or

yourself.

An

enthusiastic letter caused big men to take
time to do a favor, when the same words
said without enthusiasm got no results. Ask
for a favor in the name of a third party, if
possible, and in all events the person doing
the favor should see a benefit to himself.
Enthusiasm helps you do great amounts of
work without fatigue.
Negative vs. positive
The mind has a memory-bank of negative
memories and positive memories. When
you offer a negative thought or action, you
open the negative memory-bank and you
may lose all your power to persuade. A

negative can be effective when it is
followed by a positive statement which
does away with the negative feeling. Good
selling is honest selling. If you compromise
with your own conscience, you will weaken
your conscience, it will cease to guide you
and you cannot have peace of mind.
Enthusiasm needs focus
Many an enthusiastic man loses out
because there is not enough behind his
enthusiasm. Honest and effective selling
includes having knowledge with which to
assist the customer – and a firm desire to
be of service to him. The process of looking
for a job is a good model for other "selling
yourself" processes. It requires showing
that you really want the job, a willingness to
prepare yourself to handle the job, and,

above all, concentration on the interests of
your prospective employer.
The broad look
The affairs of life require a broad look to
give

you

perspective.

This

includes

evaluation of a job, before you take it, and
relating it to your main goal. A good part of
your life is spent in work, and you can, if
you have the right job, be happy in your
work and use your work to express
yourself. Also, you can take a broad look at
yourself and see if you can feel enthusiastic
about that person. See if he needs a
warning – straighten him out if necessary –
and encourage him with a hearty cheer.

  It Is up to You to Live the
Life the Creator Gave You
The Golden Rule can be applied all-out in
a way that will transform our economy for
the better. When people are helped to turn
their ideas into the realities of business and
production, everyone in the United States
will have more wealth and happiness. Most
of us believe in man-made gods and manmade devils. Fear has no place in a welllived life. Put your faith, not in a Creator
who bosses you but One who makes it
possible for you, as a human being, to win
success by your own efforts. Wealth now
can be yours. Peace of mind now can be
yours at the same time, but remember, this
greatest of all wealth is known only to the
person who possesses it.

"HELP me find peace of mind," the rich
man said.
This was some years ago. A trip across the
country was not then a matter of six hours
in a jet plane, but he had come across the
country to talk to me. "I have everything
money can buy," he said, "and I have lived
long enough to find out that money cannot
buy peace of mind.
Please help me find it."
A good part of this chapter consists of what
we discussed, and which I shall give to you
in a conversational manner. First, we went
into everything this book has covered – I
shall omit that part – and then we branched
out into what has been for many years my
most cherished project.

It is a business project – and a peace-ofmind project. It could bring joy and
prosperity to millions of men and women,
especially to those who need help in finding
their places in life. It would work hand in
hand with our American economy. It would
not be a "make work" project, since it would
provide services whose need is proved. It
would make profit – that indispensable
factor whose virtues have at length been
recognized even in the Soviet Union. It
would be a business project that first of all
would be a human project devoted to
creating wealth through sharing wealth.
A job for a dedicated man. "Before I tell
you about my project," I said to my visitor,
"I want to make it clear that it will need a
dedicated man to get it going. A man who
has plenty of money, plenty of time, and

plenty of' executive know-how, for all these
are needed to turn the idea into reality. He
would have to be a man who would go to
work with no thought of what he would get
out of his efforts. I say he would have to
have plenty of money because he might
lose some of his money – and he would
also have to be psychologically suited to
accept this fact without losing the peace of
mind the project would give him."
"Tell me more," said the man from
California.
"Well then, what I have in mind is a
nationwide organization to be called The
Golden Rule Industries of America." The
visitor looked puzzled. "Where does the
Golden Rule come in?"

"Suppose you had just about enough
money to live on, or even less, but you had
a sound business idea you wanted to
develop. What would you like someone to
do unto you?"
"I surely would like someone to come along
and give me capital!"
"That's what I meant. The Golden Rule
Industries of America would devote itself to
finding people who have sound business
ideas, capitalizing those ideas and helping
those

people

get

started

in

their

businesses. Then it would follow up with
business management advice, as might be
necessary. It would take care of the two
major factors which make businesses fail –
lack of capital and unsound management.
It would fill those needs for honest people

who want to get ahead but cannot fill those
needs for themselves."
My visitor looked thoughtful. "There must
be thousands of such cases."
"I am sure there are. Let me tell you of a
few I know to exist.
"There is a young woman who is clever at
designing. She wants to design and
manufacture women's garments for the
retail trade. Golden Rule Industries could
set her up in business, make sure she got
started on the right foot, and watch her
grow.

Eventually

she

would

give

employment to hundreds of people. Bear in
mind that she, and every other person
whom Golden Rule Industries aids with
capital and business advice, will be a
person who applies the Golden Rule to

others, employees in particular. Golden
Rule means that too."
"I see."
"A mechanic has built a model of an
automobile which can be manufactured
and sold for one thousand dollars. It will
travel fifty miles to the gallon, will carry
three people – ideal for the small family –
and is so simple of design that its upkeep
will be very small. Golden Rule Industries
could set up this man in a small shop and
let him expand as his business justifies.
Undoubtedly the entire automobile industry
would respond with better cars at lower
prices.
"A bright high school boy builds excellent
model airplanes. He wants to develop his
skill into a national business and employ

other high school boys, after school, as his
staff. Golden Rule Industries could help this
youth and his friends start a business and
develop it."
"That would be a wonderful head start
toward a productive life!" my visitor
exclaimed.
"It certainly would. I have in mind, too, a
certain poor farmer. I have sympathy with
poor farmers. This man wants to introduce
the growing of a certain fiber plant now
being developed in Africa, which can be
grown in our southern states. There is an
undoubted future in this, and Golden Rule
Industries could provide this man with the
land, machines and employees he needs.
"A young author has written a very
creditable novel based on life in the

mountains of Tennessee. He has not been
able to get it published, but Golden Rule
Industries could take it over for him and
capitalize its publication if need be.
"A young lady stenographer has invented a
chair so designed that it moves back and
forth with the movement of the body and
adjusts itself to fit the curvature of the back.
This is a great idea. It will lessen fatigue,
improve

work,

and

should

have

a

tremendous market. It would be a real pay
deal for Golden Rule Industries."
"Where do these ideas come from?" my
visitor wanted to know.
"Many of them represent cases I have
handled for my clients. In my endeavors to
help people stand on their own feet, I
became aware of the many who have good

ideas and plenty of ability and need only
capital and good management advice in
order to get started. Now let me tell you of
a rather special area in which Golden Rule
Industries could do a world of good.
"In every prison there are many welleducated men capable of conducting
business and educational courses for the
benefit of the other inmates. This could
result in these men being ready, willing and
able to lead honest, useful lives when they
are freed. A group of businessmen tried out
this plan in the Ohio State Penitentiary, and
it worked like a charm. The International
Correspondence Schools contributed more
than thirty-five thousand dollars worth of
textbooks. The plan could be expanded
greatly – and it is society that would profit.
I have personally appropriated this idea

and it is creating miracles of rehabilitation
in many prisons.
"A mechanic has made a model of a
prefabricated dwelling made of aluminum
sections. Any able man with a couple of
helpers can set up the walls and roof in a
day's time and start living in the house with
his family while he finishes the interior.
There are similar houses on the market, but
this one also can be taken down as easily
as it is put up, and moved to another
location,

without

damage

to

its

components."
"There's profit in that idea," said the man
from California.
"Yes, and I have a number of other ideas
just as profitable. Many of them need only
some way to get started despite the

opposition of established interests who see
only that their business world be affected,
without seeing the benefit to the economy
at large. Now let us digress from the
business ideas themselves and look at
Golden Rule Industries' general policy.
"Golden

Rule

Industries

should

be

developed with the idea that it will pay a
profit in itself as it goes along. I would,
therefore, incorporate the idea of profitsharing. Each enterprise would pay back to
the Industries  per cent of its net
earnings. Half of this amount would go to
the Industries for the use of the capital and
the business management. The other  per
cent would be used as a payment on the
original investment. When the investment
was fully repaid, each enterprise would pay
the Industries  per cent of its net earnings

thereafter

in

return

for

management

services and other services which might be
necessary.
"You can see that this policy would create
a revolving fund which could be used over
and

over

to

help

more

and

more

enterprises get started. But no enterprise
would be bound forever to the Industries.
After it paid back its capitalization, it could
leave the Industries. We wouldn't want a
monopoly. But I am quite sure that even if
an enterprise left the Industries, it would
continue on the Golden Rule basis of
sharing the wealth it creates with its own
employees, for it would be apparent by
then that this is the way to make a business
and its people prosper."
My visitor had arrived in my office with a
woebegone face. Now he was vibrant and

looked ten years younger. "That's great!"
he exclaimed. "And I can see that one
business after another would want to come
in and join hands in such an undertaking.
Why, it's the best way I ever heard of to
prevent strikes and other labor troubles."
"I believe it would create harmony and
peace of mind where those qualities are
badly needed," I said. "And it would create
all-important self-respect in giving people
an opportunity to help themselves instead
of feeding at the public trough at the
expense of others. The plan would have a
sweeping effect on our entire economy.
"Moreover, The Golden Rule Industries of
American should operate its own radio and
TV

station.

There

would

be

no

commercials. All the broadcasting time
would be devoted to teaching people, in

their own homes, all the essentials of
personal achievement. People would find
out at last that success is an inward matter
which each of us must build within himself,
rather than waiting for someone to hand
him what he needs. We will have a nation
that does not look for 'isms' to take care of
it – a nation of people who will work hard to
create wealth, in the happy confidence that
they will receive a good share."
"Great heavens, man!" my visitor broke in.
"You are talking about the millennium."
"No," I said, "I am presenting a practical
plan to save this nation from destruction by
the greedy who have not yet learned the
necessity – and the virtue – of sharing
riches.

"Golden Rule Industries would go beyond
the transformation of industry in improving
this land of ours. It would run a school for
training men and women for public office –
everything from dog-catcher to President. I
hope this school eventually would attain
such status as to make sure the voters may
select public servants on the basis of their
ability – instead of on their astuteness in
swinging votes with the application of
suitable amounts of money."
"Amen, amen!" said my visitor.
"Along with this school of political economy
there would be a citizens' committee of
men and women who are capable of
examining and grading all candidates for
public office. The people would once again
come

into

government."

full

possession

of

their

"Great! But don't you think there would be
a great deal of opposition to your plan –
both industry-wise and government-wise?
After all, you shut out a lot of nice, juicy
opportunities for exploitation."
''I'd

expect

opposition,"

I

replied.

"Opposition is a healthy circumstance. It
makes one either prove the soundness of
his plan or discover its weaknesses. I'd
expect to make adjustments as I went
along.
"There are other features I have in mind for
Golden

Rule

Industries

which

might

provoke even more opposition. The power
of the Industries' centralized buying would
be such as to cause howls from those who
think only of profit. When we helped our
members buy homes of their own – as I

believe should be done – there'd be
screams of socialism – from other interests.
"When we helped Industries' members,
including their employees, with such
services as may be given by physicians,
dentists, attorneys, even beauticians – and
made sure they received the finest service
at the lowest possible fees – the screams
would rise to a crescendo. In the end,
however, it would be recognized that the
plan represents democracy operating on
the highest possible scale of efficiency. All
men who wish to live and let live will
welcome this plan that adds so much to
living. Our strength would lie in the fact that
such people vastly outnumber the people
who want to dominate and exploit others."
My visitor thought a moment. "And this
would begin with finding people who have

sound business ideas, and getting them
into action."
"That is right. It would bring worthy beliefs
of the human mind onto the plane of worthy
achievement. The more we have in the
world of this process, the better world we
build." My visitor sat a while. At last he
arose and laid some large bills on my desk.
"I want you to have this honorarium in
return for the help you have given me. I am
going to swing into action with a new and
better philosophy of life than any I ever
have known in the past. I do not know if I
am the man with the money, the time, the
philosophy and the business experience to
initiate Golden Rule Industries. But I see
now what life can be when men cooperate
in the production of goods and services for
each other. I see why I made money but

never found peace of mind. I see what has
been lacking in my life, and I feel better, Dr.
Hill. Yes, sir, I feel better than I have felt in
years. You have done more for me than a
number of doctors have been able to do."
My visitor never returned. Golden Rule
Industries still remains a dream – yet, in
part, it is a dream I see coming true. Our
economy grows less and less the hunting
ground of the industrial pirate. It is only
here and there that I see the development
of

cooperation,

but

I

do

see

that

groundswell of sharing the wealth, and it is
this philosophy, based on the Golden Rule,
which will keep America great; not the
practice of handing out government doles
to people who have done nothing to
deserve them.

Peace of mind vs. man-made gods and
man-made devils. We are approaching
the end of this book. You see by now that
the power of firm, free belief comes with an
untrammeled mind the power to turn what
the human mind believes into what the
human mind achieves rarely can be found
by a man who is hemmed in with fear and
misdirection.
There are some exceptions. You can see
men in business still making money while
they harm others in making it, but this type
is nowhere nearly as prevalent as it was
fifty years ago.
You can see exceptions elsewhere, too.
Unfortunately, the human mind is capable
of believing in man-made images which it
sets up as Great Truths. This belief can
lead to so-called achievement on its own

plane; for instance, the achievement of
great societies known as religions which
teach that you will fry in Hell if you do not
believe certain things.
I write here for strong people – for people
who realize that the most cherished beliefs
nevertheless can be wrong in that they
hinder the development of the human spirit.
They claim to develop that spirit – but they
develop it as much as a man's view of the
world would be developed if he walked in a
narrow alley between two high walls all his
life.
Regardless of your emotions right now,
surely you have been impressed by the fact
that the Creator provided you with control
over your own power of thought and made
it impossible for any person to rob you of
this privilege – unless you let him.

In my decades of research into the roots of
personal achievement, I came across a
book called Catalogue of the Gods. This
book gave a brief description of each of the
THIRTY THOUSAND man-made gods
which men have worshiped since the
beginning of civilization.
Yes, THIRTY THOUSAND.
These sacred objects ranged all the way
from the common angle-worm to the sun
which warms our earth. They included
almost every conceivable object between
these two extremes, such as fish, snakes,
tigers, cows, birds, rivers, oceans, and the
genital organs of man.
Who made these objects into gods? Man
himself. Which ones were authentic gods?
Ask any worshiper and he would tell you,

and eventually you would have a list of
thirty thousand authentic gods, one just as
authentic as another.
If I undertook to describe the miseries of
mankind which can be laid at the feet (if
they had feet) of those thirty thousand
gods, and the fears and miseries and
failures they have inspired in the minds of
men, I would need more than one lifetime
in which to do the job properly.
Man made a great step forward in his own
behalf when he began to see a Creator, not
gods, and removed this Creator from any
connection

with

earthly

objects.

The

ancient Hebrews performed this service for
man. (One of the Egyptian kings appears
to have come to the same conclusion some
centuries before they did, but his priests
saw to it that he died young).

Yet what have we done with this belief? My
own case is the one I know best. Until my
father married the woman who saved me,
the family in which I grew up was
dominated by fear. It contributed to the
support of an organization dedicated to
maintaining that fear; it is known as the
Hard-shell Baptists.
A preacher could visit our community only
once a month, but on those occasions, I
was forced to listen to four or five hours of
preachment. We were thundered at with
pictures of a Hell waiting to receive us with
fire and brimstone, and at times I could
smell the stuff burning.
One night when I was seven or eight, I
dreamed I was down there chained to an
iron post. My body was almost covered with
a great pile of fresh brimstone. Here came

Satan, swishing his tail, and with an evil
grin he set fire to the brimstone. I awoke
screaming.

One

needs

no

formal

knowledge of psychology to know this is
not good for any child. But when I tried to
stay away from the church that gave me
dreadful

nightmares,

I

was

thrashed

without mercy.
The Creator I know. One day I overheard
my stepmother say to my father 'The only
real devil that exists in this or any other
world is the man whose business is that of
making devils." I accepted this statement
instantly and never have departed from it.
I have taken pains to put into this book the
fact that my father's prayers seemed to
have focused powers of healing beyond
medicine, which saved my life when I had

typhoid fever. That was his time of faith, not
fear.
In denying that I have anything to fear, I
also deny that anyone has knowledge
enough to tell me anything definite about
the spirit that rules the universe.
A theologian might say – although these
days they are becoming wary of saying it
"Somewhere up there is Heaven, where
God dwells, and all His acceptable children
go there when they leave their earthly
bodies and gather around Him."
A scientist might say "I have turned my
telescope outward into space in all
directions. I have looked into space for
distances equivalent to millions of lightyears, but nowhere do I see the slightest
trace of anything resembling Heaven."

The Creator whom I know is not separated
from me by light-years nor by any other
distance. I see evidence of His existence in
every blade of grass, every flower, every
tree, every creature on this earth, in the
order of the stars and the plants which float
out there in space, in the electrons and
protons of matter, and most especially in
the marvelous working principles of the
human mind and the body within which it
operates.
If you would rather speak of a force or a
presence for a limitless intelligence rather
than a Creator, it is the same. It is there. Is
it affected by our worship? I doubt it. Can
we sometimes attune ourselves so that we
receive help from universal vibrations?
This, I believe, is almost certainly true.

I do not even attempt to guess the overall
purpose or plan behind the universe. So far
as I can tell, there is no plan for man except
to come into this world, live a little while,
and go. While he lives, he is given the
opportunity to make himself and his fellow
men better beings, perhaps a more
advanced form of man, as Lecomte du
Nouy suggests. But – his ultimate purpose?
I do not think anyone knows more about
that than I know, and I know nothing about
it.
Your greatness is here and now. Your
happiness is here and now. Here are some
of the factors which create peace of mind.
They are involved in creating money –
wealth as well; but let us set that aside for
the time being. Here are some peace-ofmind factors; read them carefully; note that

you have met them in this book, in one form
or another, and note that you have heard
about them from other sources as well.
You must come to realize you have a
conscience which will guide you, and stay
on good terms with your conscience so it
will guide you well.
You must take possession of your own
mind, do your own thinking, live your own
life.
You must keep yourself so busy living your
own life that you will not be tempted to
interfere in the lives of others.
You must learn to free your life of
unnecessary encumbrances, both material
and mental.

You must establish harmony in your own
home and harmony with those among
whom you work.
You must share your blessings with others,
and do this wholeheartedly.
You must look at the realities of life as they
are, not as you wish them to be, and
properly evaluate them.
You must help others to find and develop
their own powers to make themselves what
they want to be.
Now, I did not invent these ways of winning
peace of mind. They were known of old.
They are the ways which have proved
themselves right, strong and eternal. If I
have made these ways more clear to you,
and if I have given you practical ways in
which to apply them, well and good; but the

wisdom behind them is the gathered
wisdom of mankind.
And so you have heard before of these
peace-of-mind factors. Perhaps they were
told to you as ways to help yourself get to
Heaven. This belief leaves you up against
a blank wall. I give them to you as
representative of the tried and true
methods which help you live a healthier,
wealthier, better life, here, on this earth,
now. Is this not sufficient?
The Creator in your life. You have seen
that I do not deny the concept of a Creator
as

an

eternal

and

all-pervading

intelligence, or cosmic force. But the
Creator with whom I made my peace many
years ago does not require me to be afraid
of Him; nor does He offer Himself to me

merely through the intervention of any
particular religion.
My Creator gave me His greatest blessing
when He made me human.
He gave me the power to choose between
good and bad, and made my concept as
wide as all the affairs of the world and all its
people. He set me at large upon the world
to learn that my good deeds are rewarded
in kind, and my bad deeds are just as
inexorably

made

to

draw

penalties

according to their nature. He gave me a
mind beyond the mind of any other of His
creatures, and He made me free to use my
mind as only a human being can use his
mindpower.
I can pray, and in constructive prayer that
does not amount to begging for special

favors. I can find faith which vastly enlarges
my powers. Yet always I know I am the
master of my fate, I am the captain of my
soul, for so my Creator made me, and so I
need not call upon Him constantly for
guidance. Have you ever noticed that the
one who does the praying very often has a
large part in the answering of the prayer? I
allow for the prayer that goes Beyond; but I
believe that many a prayer stays within the
one who prays and strengthens him in his
realization of his own human abilities.
The Creator's place in your life is to help
you be more triumphantly your own
master. The Creator made you a creature
who can think for himself, be himself,
believe in what he wishes to accomplish,
and mightily achieve! Do less than this and

you cannot possibly fulfill yourself in all
your glorious humanity.
The mind of man is filled with powers to be
used, not to be neglected. These powers,
these blessings, either are used – and the
benefits of their use shared with others – or
you incur penalties for not using them.
If you needed a house, and knew how to
build a house, and had all the materials you
needed for building a house and had a lot
on which to build a house, and yet
neglected to build a house – then you
would understand your penalty as you sat
exposed in the rain and the snow.
Too many of us do not use our power to
gather in the wealth and peace of mind
which is available all around us. Then we
are penalized by poverty, by misery, by

worry and ill health and we blame everyone
but ourselves.
Anything the human mind can believe. the
human mind can achieve.
Believe in poverty and you will be poor.
Believe in wealth and you will be rich.
Believe in love and you will have love.
Believe in health and you will be healthy.
You have seen what lies behind these
statements. It would be well to read this
book

again

and

refresh

your

understanding. No book can give you all its
wealth at the first reading. Make friends
with this book, read it again, put it away for
a while, take it out and read it once more,
and you will read much between the lines –
and much that applies to you.

I have shared with you what may be merely
words, or great wealth and contentment –
depending on how you use them. I am glad
I cannot force you to use the knowledge I
have given you. I am glad it is up to you to
improve your own life.
I leave you now with no great ceremony.
Remember There is no good thing in the
world that is not available to you if you
sufficiently desire it.
And remember No matter what others may
see of your possessions after you make a
great deal of money ... no matter how they
may respect your offices and influence and
talents ... no matter how much they may
admire your generosity, your kindliness,
your willingness to live and let live ... you
yourself are the only one who can hold and

enjoy your greatest treasure, peace of
mind.
Cherish your visions and your dreams.
They are the children of your soul, the
blueprints of your ultimate achievements.
Checking on Grow Rich with Peace of
Mind
Know your own mind – live your own life
You can make your life what you want it to
be – but it must be your own life. We all
have a great effect upon each other, but the
dream you make into solid reality is your
dream. Let your effect on others show itself
in helping them realize their own powers in
finding their own high destiny. Setting a
time limit for a specific accomplishment is a
vast aid in attaining your goal despite any
obstacles. Go back and read how to set up

spiritual defenses within your mind, so that
your thoughts remain your own, attuned to
great powers.
Close the doors on your past
Look to the past only for what it taught you.
Many great men have histories of failure,
but they never were held back by the
spiritual chains of old mistakes. We need
wealth for peace of mind, since the povertystricken also are stricken with insecurity
and worry; but the trappings of wealth can
rob you of peace when they become an
end in themselves. The job that builds your
future is the job to which you give the fullest
measure. Where you start never matters so
much as where you are going. Start by
going the extra mile. Go back and read
what it means to go the extra mile.

The basic mental attitude that brings wealth
and peace of mind
Make sure your mind says YES to life. A
positive mental attitude keeps your mind on
your goal and shows you the road to your
goal. We are governed by nine basic
motives, seven of which are connected
strongly to peace of mind. When you rise
above the temptation to be dishonest, you
do more for your peace of mind than any
money can, and you set up positive
emotion – habits which take root in
everything you do. A positive mental
attitude often is the secret of "genius" mindpower. Go back and read how to set up ten
Princes of Guidance to keep negative
influences out of your mind.
When you are free of fear, you are free to
live

Fear is like prayer in reverse; it appeals to
negative forces which hurt us, instead of to
positive forces which help and sustain us.
The fear of poverty brings poverty; the fear
of criticism cripples initiative. To free
yourself of the fear of adversity, remember
that every adversity carries the seed of an
equivalent or greater benefit. Caution
under

dangerous

circumstances

is

advisable but search your fears and you
will see that invariably they are self-made,
a manmade devil. Self-confident faith in
yourself is an indispensable ingredient for
good living. Go back and check the
complete list of fears which bring forth
corresponding damaging reality – if your
mind allows.
Will you master money – or will it master
you?

You may lose peace of mind by pursuing
money too anxiously. The man who makes
a big splash may be the man who has gone
overboard. "Enough" money is a relative
sum. When you feel you will be satisfied
with enough for solid comfort and security,
and some luxuries, you often attain more.
Work is a human necessity, and anyone
who gets his money without work – as is
the case with many rich men's sons – has
been robbed of his birthright of selfreliance. Some of the money you make
should stay with you, for thrift gives many
benefits besides money in the bank. Go
back and read the basic steps that can
build your income and can be applied to
almost any circumstances.
The blessed art of sharing your riches

Wealth that is shared creates more wealth.
The helping hand you give another can
repay you many-fold. Millionaires today
realize that when wealth is distributed it
creates

opportunities.

Discontented

workers become contented, ambitious
workers when they learn the Science of
Personal Achievement. When you share
the wealth in your own home, you create
peace of mind in a most important area of
your life. The three basic motives of love,
sex, and money are said to rule the world.
When you practice sharing you will never
have to ask "What wealth have I to share?"
Go back and read the basic ways of
sharing; they are a road to wealth.
How to develop your own healthy ego
Ego is the "self-assertive tendency of man."
It can transcend many an obstacle, even

get a man a great job when he looks like a
tramp. Ask yourself certain questions
concerning your childhood, and you may
find what is hurting your ego and be able to
overcome

this

long-ago

influence.

A

healthy ego makes you more receptive to
the influences which guide you from a
region beyond the power of our five senses
to know. A salesman sells through his ego.
When the ego is strong, it attracts success.
When the ego is weak, it can be
strengthened. Go back and read how men
found their own ego-boosters and learn
how to find your own.
How to transmute sex emotion into
achievement power
Unlike other mammals, man's sexual drive
is always with him. This drive can be
wasted, or it can be transmuted into

sparkling

energy

which

shows

in

everything a man does. Like ego, sexual
energy can help you rise above outward
appearances. Many a man uses his energy
in the wrong direction but performs
miracles of achievement when he puts
himself on the right path. You can make
sure you are the beneficiary of your sexual
drive – not its victim. Sexual energy can
invigorate the subconscious mind's ability
to form new patterns out of known facts and
thus come up with new inventions and new
opportunities. Go back and read about the
connection

between

experience

and

intuition. See what intuition can do for you.
To succeed in life, succeed in being
yourself
Let nothing be bigger in your life than being
yourself. Many a man has been bribed

away from the job in which he fulfilled
himself and now has riches but no peace of
mind.

You

interfering

can

help

others

without

with

their

possession

of

themselves; do not expect other people to
meet your idea of "perfect." Practice selfcontrol as a means of being your best self,
and you will not suffer the results of anger
and animosity. Your mind is your only
master. Be sure to live your life exactly as
you wish to live it; for a while every day do
only what pleases you. Be patient in your
search for peace of mind; that great quality
is built out of many days of progress. Go
back and read about the definite, forceful
ways you can practice being yourself.
The Master Mind group; a power beyond
science

A great deal of knowledge in other minds
can be transferred to your own. You can
get "in tune" with a mind sympathetic to
yours

and

double

your

mind-power.

Modern discoveries tie in with older
theories as to why one mind should be able
to communicate with another's, and one
day we may be able to tune in one mind to
another just as today we tune in radio
stations. When you see your problems
through other eyes, you often see the
solution of your problems. Form a Master
Mind group of friends who share your
interests, and all can reap benefit from the
spoken

and

unspoken

thoughts

you

exchange. Go back and read the rules to
follow for a successful, profitable Master
Mind group.

Win mighty aid from the eternal Law of
Compensation
Emerson's essay on Compensation is must
reading for people who want understanding
and wealth. When you give of yourself, the
Law of Compensation assures a reward will
come back to you, although it may take a
long time. You will be compensated by
punishment for any wrong done. Unseen,
silent forces influence us constantly. The
tendency

to

envy

others

and

take

advantage of others will disappear when
you understand the Law of Compensation.
Philosophy sometimes is "out of this world,"
but it can be practical and positive. The true
philosopher is proof against much that
upsets and defeats other men. Go back
and read everything quoted from Emerson.
You are very important – for a little while

Nobody builds his success through his own
efforts alone. Self-importance hurts the
conscience,

but

true

perspective

on

yourself aids peace of mind. Ultimately,
nothing matters. This world matters now,
however, and accounts are balanced in this
world before you leave it. In the Jungle of
Life there are unseen watchers. A great
reservoir of wisdom is kept for the benefit
of mankind, and those who conquer the
enemies of man come through the jungle
unharmed and are ready to take the next
step upward. Your life-experience can and
should qualify you for wealth and peace of
mind to enjoy for yourself and to share with
others. Go back and read the list of the
enemies of man; see how many you met
today.
Not too much, not too little

Wealth comes to the man who sees and
uses his potential for wealth. Potential all
around you is not wealth till you bring
wealth into being. Grabbing for wealth may
cause you to lose that wealth. Do not limit
what you give, only what you take. The
Golden Rule, ancient in the time of Jesus,
remains a true guide. Give the other fellow
what he needs and you do justice to the
Golden Rule. You can notice the effect on
character when a person never has
allowed the Golden Rule to enter his life. A
man's services generally are worth what he
is paid for them, and a man has a way of
putting a price on himself. The Golden Rule
cannot be cheated. Go back and read and
remember the Golden Rule in the form that
really makes it work.
The magic power of belief

Anything the human mind can believe; the
human mind can achieve; this is the
Supreme Secret. A wish occurs on the
surface of the mind; a true belief becomes
part of you. Decide on the belief you want,
send it down into your subconscious mind,
and your subconscious will thereafter see
to it that you act on the belief. Nobody
knows the limit of the power of belief. It
even effects physical changes in the body.
The human mind now is transforming
humanity and the world in which man lives.
You can take your part in this mighty
process by using every bit of your human
power. Go back and read how to implant
belief in your subconscious mind through
the art of auto-suggestion.
Enthusiasm – and something more

What you say without enthusiasm may get
no results, while the same thing, said with
enthusiasm,

wins



per

cent

achievement. Enthusiasm helps in selling
anything, but it cannot make up for lack of
honesty and a true regard for the
customer's best interests. Enthusiasm
opens vast reserves of energy. Any
negative thought or action interferes with
the process of selling, but a negative can
be transmuted into a positive. Focus your
enthusiasms toward a goal and know that
if your goal is not honest you cannot feel
and use the magic of enthusiasm. Take a
broad look at yourself and see if you are a
person

who

arouses

enthusiasm

in

yourself. Go back and read the formula that
can get you the job you want.

It is up to you to live the life the Creator
gave you
A rich man who could not find peace of
mind found out a way to run business that
could give peace of mind to millions and
wealth as well. It is the Golden Rule applied
to our economy. Too many of us are reared
according to rules which require us to live
in fear and believe in a Creator who must
be placated. Man has made thirty thousand
gods; can they all be authentic? A few of
the rules for peace of mind may sound like
rules you learned for going to Heaven, but
they refer to happiness here and now –
happiness you can attain for yourself. The
mind of man is filled with powers to be
used, not neglected.
Think awhile. See what part of this book
comes most strongly to your memory. Go

back and read that part very carefully. You
have

kept

it

in

your

subconscious;

therefore, it must have, somewhere in it, a
message of special importance to YOU.




INTRODUCTION
Every inspirational, self-help action book, including this one,
should be evaluated by what happens to you, the reader, as a
result of the book's power to motivate you to motivate yourself to
desirable action. By this standard, Success Through a Positive
Mental Attitude is reputed to be one of the outstandingly
successful inspirational, self-help action books of this century. It
has inspired countless thousands of men, women, and teenagers
to acquire good physical, mental and moral health; seek
happiness; pursue wealth and reach for high goals or other
objectives that do not violate the laws of God or the rights of their
fellow men.
Something wonderful is going to happen to you — if you are
ready. To prepare yourself to be ready, understand clearly
Andrew Carnegie's observation that all achievement, all earned
riches, have their beginning in an idea!
Before proceeding further, I'd like to give you a background of
my co-author. Dr. Napoleon Hill.
Think and grow rich. Think and Grow Rich, the book by
Napoleon Hill, has motivated more persons throughout the world
to acquire wealth and succeed in their careers than any book
written in the twentieth century. Its author was born in poverty in
a log cabin in Wise County, Virginia, on October , and he
passed away in Greenville, South Carolina, on November ,
.
As a boy, young Hill was blessed, inspired and motivated to high
achievement by his calm, patient stepmother who loved him
dearly. It was she, who motivated "a problem child" to develop
character and motivate himself to work hard to become educated
and an achiever.


In , while working for a magazine and attending college,
young Hill was assigned to interview Andrew Carnegie, the great
steelmaker, philosopher and philanthropist.
Andrew Carnegie was so impressed with his interviewer that he
invited him to his home as a guest. Hour after hour each day
during the three-day visit, the two men discussed philosophy. The
elder romanced the lives of philosophers and the impact their
philosophy had had on world civilization to the younger, who
listened with rapture.
In his discussions, Carnegie made it a point to express in simple,
clear language the principles involved and the concepts of each of
the philosophers he romanced. And he told something more how
to apply those principles in everyday living as they pertain to an
individual, his family, his career or any human activity.
Andrew Carnegie knew human nature. One way to
motivate an aggressive extrovert with a high energy level who
has drive and stick-to-itiveness, and whose reason and emotions
are in balance, is to challenge him. The young guest was just such
a person. And he was challenged.
"What is there in the climate of this great nation whereby I, a
foreigner, can build a business and acquire wealth — or anyone
can achieve success?" asked Carnegie. And before Hill could
answer, he continued, "I challenge you to devote  years of your
life to the study of the philosophy of American achievement and
come up with an answer. Will you accept?"
"Yes!" was the quick response.
Andrew Carnegie had an obsession Anything in life worth having
was worth working for. He was willing to give the young author
his personal time to consult with him and letters of introduction


to the outstanding Americans of his day, and to reimburse him for
any necessary out-of-pocket expense, such as traveling to
interview people. But it was clearly understood that Napoleon
Hill would have to earn his own livelihood.
In the following  years, Hill interviewed over  successful
men. Among them were Henry Ford, William Wrigley, Jr., John
Wanamaker, George Eastman, John D. Rockefeller, Thomas A.
Edison, Theodore Roosevelt, Albert Hubbard, J. Ogden Armour,
Luther Burbank, Dr. Alexander Graham Bell and Julius
Rosenwald.
And Hill did earn his own livelihood — by applying many of the
principles he learned from Carnegie and the men he interviewed.
And in , he completed the eight volumes of The Law of
Success — books that motivated thousands to acquire wealth or
to become outstanding achievers.
On the recommendation of Senator Jennings Randolph of West
Virginia, Napoleon Hill became an adviser to two Presidents of
the United States Woodrow Wilson and Franklin D. Roosevelt.
He influenced certain decisions they made that affected the
course of American history.
When, exactly twenty years after the interview with Andrew
Carnegie, The Law of Success was published, it had a worldwide
impact. Seven years later, while be was an adviser to Franklin D.
Roosevelt, he began writing the manuscript for Think and Grow
Rich. It was published in . More than ten million people
have read the book.
In , Think and Grow Rich was given
to me by Morris Pickus, a well-known sales executive, sales
counselor and lecturer. The philosophy in so many respects
coincided with my own that I sent the book to every one of my


sales representatives throughout the United States. (At that time, I
owned and operated Combined Registry Company, a national
sales organization that specialized exclusively in the sale of
accident insurance.)
Bingo! I hit the jackpot, for I made a profitable discovery. I found
a working tool that would motivate sales representatives to
motivate themselves to increase their sales and profits — and
something more to acquire wealth through responding to an
inspirational, self-help action book.
"Now, what has relating the story about Carnegie, The Law of
Success and Think and Grow Rich to do with Success Through a
Positive Mental Attitude?" you ask. My answer "If it were not
for each of them, the manuscript for this book would not have
been written. But it was written, and it was first published in
 by Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Think and Grow Rich contains the basic principles of
Andrew Carnegie's philosophy — those contained in The Law of
Success — and Napoleon Hill’s philosophy and experiences, as
well as stories about many people who acquired wealth and
success after reading the eight volumes of The Law of Success.
Success Through a Positive Mental Attitude combines all these in
essence, and has something more. It tells specifically how you
can use the greatest machine that was ever conceived — a
machine so awesome that only God Himself could create it. This
machine is a human computer; it is your brain and your nervous
system, from which the mechanical computer was designed.
Success Through a Positive Mental Attitude instructs you on what
to do and how to do it when it comes to tapping and using the
powers of your subconscious mind. Where have you been taught
to constructively use, neutralize, control or harmonize with your
passions, emotions, instincts, tendencies, feelings, moods and


habits of thought and action? Have you been taught how to aim
high and achieve your goals regardless of the obstacles? If your
answer is "No." you will be taught these things if you read and
then apply the principles in Success Through a Positive Mental
Attitude.
= Over the last  years, more than
, hardbound copies of Success Through a Positive Mental
Attitude have been printed. Our readers have had such
phenomenal results in changing their lives for the better, meeting
life's problems courageously and bringing their desires into
reality that I was delighted when arrangements were made for
Pocket Books to publish the paperback edition, for the books
published by Pocket Books reach hundreds of thousands. And my
chief goal, and Napoleon Hill's, was to motivate multitudes of
people to free themselves from the slavery of their undesirable
thoughts, habits and actions and to help them seek and acquire the
true riches of life by fulfilling desires that don't violate the laws
of God or the rights of their fellow men.
In the preface by
Og Mandino to this edition of Success Through a Positive Mental
Attitude, you read
/

'

!

=%

/
!
!
! !
!

#
/

!
#
! '
====

#
$
#
#
/
$

!

#

=  !

"



!
#
! ? =
!

Og Mandino is now famous as a lecturer and author of The
Greatest Salesman in the World and other self-help books. And
Norman Vincent Peale and other well-known authors have told
me many times how they have inspired others to high personal
achievement by quoting illustrations and principles from Success
Through a Positive Mental Attitude.
I was recently invited to dinner at one of Washington's famous
restaurants by a friend. Jimmy, the waiter, rendered the most
pleasant and effective service I have ever gotten at any fine
restaurant in any part of the world. After dinner, as my party was
leaving the restaurant, Jimmy asked me aside and said, "May I
take half a minute of your time?"
"Certainly." I responded.
"I just wanted to tell you that Success Through a Positive Mental
Attitude saved my life," he said.
Another man, Ted G., told me "When I was on the Lee Phillips
Show, you said you were going to change my life. Well, you did,
and here's a list of the changes that took place in five years I
went into business, and I m doing very well two of my daughters
graduated from college, and one is still attending a private college
(previously I had no funds for college education for them); I
purchased a condominium with a swimming pool, golf course,
etc. I've had beautiful vacations and much more! Many thanks
again for Success Through a Positive Mental Attitude. It is always
on my night table and I consider it one of my valued
possessions."
A doctor who practices in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, on two
occasions when I met him said, "I thought you would be
interested in knowing that one of my most effective prescriptions



to certain patients with psychosomatic illnesses is a special one.
I prescribe a book Success Through a Positive Mental Attitude."
While there are several thousands of experiences that could be
related, the greatest testimonial can be your experience when you
learn and apply the principles in this book.
When you read this book, read it as if the
authors were your personal friends and were writing to you —
and you alone. Underscore sentences, quotations and words that
are meaningful to you. Memorize self-motivators. Keep in mind
that this is a book to motivate you to desirable action.
Abraham Lincoln developed the habit of trying to learn from the
books he read, the people he met and casual events. These gave
him ideas for reflection. And thus he was able to relate, assimilate
and use ideas as his own.
You too can convert your creative thinking, artistic talent,
knowledge, personality and physical energy into success, wealth.
health and happiness. This book more than tells you how it
motivates you to try.
Look for the message that is applicable to you. When you
recognize it. Pay attention! Get into action! To direct your mind
into desired channels, try to answer each question at the end of
each chapter during your thinking and planning time.
=  % $) )$



CHAPTER 
Meet the Most Important Living Person
Meet the most important living person!
Somewhere in this book, you will meet him — suddenly,
surprisingly and with a shock of recognition that will change your
whole life. When you do meet him, you will discover his secret.
You will discover that he carries with him an invisible talisman
with the initials PMA emblazoned on one side, and NMA on the
other.
This invisible talisman has two amazing powers it has the power
to attract wealth, success, happiness and health; and it has the
power to repel these things — to rob you of all that makes life
worth living. It is the first of these powers, PMA, that enables
some men to climb to the top and stay there. It is the second that
keeps other men at the bottom all their lives. It is NMA that pulls
other men down from the top when they have reached it.
Perhaps the story of S. B. Fuller will illustrate how it works.
!
"
# ! S. B. Fuller was one of
seven children of a Negro tenant farmer in Louisiana. He started
to work at the age of five. By the time he was nine, he was
driving mules. There was nothing unusual in this the children of
most of the tenant farmers went to work early. These families
accepted poverty as their lot and asked for no better.
Young Fuller was different from his friends in one way he had a
remarkable mother. His mother refused to accept this hand-to

mouth existence for her children, though it was all she had ever
known. She knew there was something wrong with the fact that
her family was barely getting along in a world of joy and plenty.
She used to talk to her son about her dreams.
"We shouldn't be poor, S. B.," she used to say. "And don't ever let
me hear you say that it is God's Will that we are poor. We are
poor — not because of God. We are poor because father has
never developed a desire to become rich. No one in our family
has ever developed a desire to be anything else."
No one had developed a desire to be wealthy. This idea became
so deeply ingrained in Fuller's mind that it changed his whole
life. He began to want to be rich. He kept his mind on the things
he did want and off the things, he didn't want. Thus, he developed
a burning desire to become rich. The quickest way to make
money, he decided, was to sell something. He chose soap. For
twelve years he sold it, door to door. Then he learned that the
company which supplied him was going to be sold at auction.
The firm price was $,. In twelve years of selling and
setting aside every penny, he had saved $,. It was agreed
that he would deposit his $, and obtain the balance of
$, within a ten-day period. Written into the contract was
the condition that if he did not raise the money, he would lose his
deposit.
During his twelve years as a soap salesman, S. B. Fuller had
gained the respect and admiration of many businessmen. He went
to them now. He obtained money from personal friends, too, and
from loan companies and investment groups. On the eve of the
tenth day, he had raised $, He was $, short.
"I had exhausted every source of credit I
knew," he recalls. "It was late at night. In the darkness of my
room, I knelt down and prayed. I asked God to lead me to a


person who would let me have the $, in time. I said to
myself that I would drive down st Street until I saw the first
light in a business establishment. I asked God to make the light a
sign indicating His answer."
It was eleven o'clock at night when S. B. Fuller drove down
Chicago's st Street. At last, alter several blocks he saw a light
in a contractor's office.
He walked in. There, seated at his desk, tired from working late at
night, sat a man whom Fuller knew slightly. Fuller realized that
he would have to be bold,
"Do you want to make $,?" asked Fuller straight out. The
contractor was taken aback at the question. "Yes," he said. "Of
course."
"Then make out a check for $, and when I bring back the
money, I'll bring back another $, profit," Fuller recalls
telling this man. He gave the contractor the names of the other
people who had lent him money, and explained in detail exactly
what the business venture was.
Let's explore his secret of success. Before he left that night, S.
B. Fuller had a check for $, in his pocket. Subsequently, he
obtained controlling interest not only in that company, but in
seven others, including four cosmetic companies, a hosiery
company, a label company, and a newspaper. When we asked
him recently to explore with us the secret of his success, he
answered in terms of his mother's statement so many years
before
"We are poor — not because of God. We are poor because father
has never developed a desire to become rich. No one in our
family has ever developed a desire to be anything else.''


"You see," he told us, "I knew what I wanted, but I didn't know
how to get it. So I read The Bible and inspirational books for a
purpose. I prayed for the knowledge to achieve my objectives.
Three books played an important part in transmuting my burning
desire into reality. They were () The Bible, () Think and Grow
Rich, and () The Secret of the Ages. My greatest inspiration
comes from reading The Bible.
"If you know what you want, you are more apt to recognize it
when you see it. When you read a book, for example, you will
recognize opportunities to help you get what you want."
S. B. Fuller carried with him the invisible talisman with the
initials PMA imprinted on one side and NMA on the other. He
turned the PMA side up and things happened. He was able to
bring into reality ideas that were formerly mere daydreams.
Now the important thing to notice here is that S. B. Fuller started
life with fewer advantages than most of us have. But he chose a
big goal and headed for it of course, the choice of goal was
individual. In these times and in this country you still have your
personal right to say; "This is what I choose. This is what I want
most to accomplish." And unless your goal is against the laws of
God or society, you can achieve it. You have everything to gain
and nothing to lose by trying. Success is achieved and maintained
by those who keep trying with PMA.
What you try for is up to you. Not everyone would care to be an
S. B. Fuller, responsible for large manufacturing concerns. Not
everyone would choose to pay the costly price of being a great
artist. To many, the riches of life are quite different. A skill in
day-to-day living which adds up to a happy, love-filled life is
success. You can have this and other riches too. The choice is
yours.



But whether success to you means becoming rich as it did to S. B.
Fuller, or the discovery of a new element in chemistry, or the
creation of a piece of music, or the growing of a rose, or the
nurturing of a child — no matter what success means to you —
the invisible talisman with the initials PMA emblazoned on one
side and NMA on the other can help you achieve it You attract
the good and desirable with PMA. You repel them with NMA.
$

%
"But what if I have a physical handicap? How can a
change of attitude help me?" you may ask. Perhaps the story of
Tom Dempsey, a boy who was disabled at birth, will give you
your answer.
Tom was born without half a right foot and only a stub of a right
arm. As a boy, he wanted to engage in sports as the other boys
did. He had a burning desire to play football. Because of this
desire, his parents had an artificial foot made for him. It was
made of wood. The wooden foot was encased in a special stubby
football shoe. Hour after hour, day after day, Tom would practice
kicking the football with his wooden foot. He would try and keep
on trying to make field goals at greater and greater distances. He
became so proficient that he was hired by the New Orleans
Saints.
The screams of , football fans could be heard throughout
the entire United States when, within the last two seconds of the
game, Tom Dempsey — with his crippled leg — kicked a recordbreaking -yard field goal. It was the longest field goal ever
kicked in a professional football game. It gave the Saints a
winning score of - over the Detroit Lions.
"We were beaten by a miracle," said Detroit coach Joseph
Schmidt. And to many, it was a miracle — an answer to a prayer.



"Tom Dempsey didn't kick that field goal, God kicked it," said
Lion linebacker Wayne Walker.
"Interesting. But what does the Tom Dempsey story mean to
me?" you may ask.
Our response would be "Very little — unless you develop the
habit of recognizing, relating, assimilating and using universal
principles and adopt them as your very own. Then follow through
with desirable action."
And what are the principles you could apply from the Tom
Dempsey story, whether or not you are physically disabled? They
can be learned and applied by children and adults
!

#
=

'

!
.% =

#

)
'

#

!

!
===

===

=

!

#

# '



=
#
!
%

!

#

.%

=
#

#

=

To learn and apply these principles, turn up your invisible
talisman to the PMA side.
When Henley wrote the poetic lines, "I am the master of my fate,
I am the captain of my soul," he could have informed us that we


are the masters of our fate because we are masters, first, of our
attitudes. Our attitudes shape our future. This is a universal law.
The poet could have told us with great emphasis that this law
works whether the attitudes are destructive or constructive. The
law states that we translate into physical reality the thoughts and
attitudes which we hold in our minds, no matter what they are.
We translate into reality thoughts of poverty just as quickly as we
do thoughts of riches. But when our attitude towards ourselves is
big, and our attitude towards others is generous and merciful, we
attract big and generous portions of success.
Consider the example of Henry J. Kaiser, a
truly successful person because his attitude towards himself is
big. Companies identified with the name Henry J. Kaiser hold
assets of more than one billion dollars. Because he is generous
and merciful to others, the speechless have been made to talk, the
crippled have been restored to useful lives, and hundreds of
thousands of persons have received hospital care at a very low
cost All this grew from seeds of thought planted within him by
his mother.
Mary Kaiser gave her son Henry the priceless gift. She also
taught him to apply the greatest value in life.
. The priceless gift After her day's work, Mary Kaiser would
spend hours as a volunteer nurse, helping the unfortunate. Often
she said to her son, "Henry, nothing is ever accomplished without
work. If I leave you nothing else but the will to work, I will have
left you the priceless gift the joy of work."
. The greatest value in life "It was my mother," said Mr. Kaiser,
"who first taught me some of the greatest values in life. Among
these were the love of people and the importance of serving
others. Loving people and serving them, she used to say, is the
greatest value in life."


Henry J. Kaiser knows the power of PMA. He knows what it can
do in his life and for his country. He also knows the force of
NMA. During World War II he built over  ships with such
rapidity that he startled the world. When he said, "We can
construct a Liberty Ship every ten days," the experts said, "It can't
be done — it's impossible!" Yet Kaiser did it. Those who believe
they can't repel the positive; they use the negative side of their
talisman. Those who believe they can repel the negative; they use
the positive side.
That is why we must be cautions when we use this talisman. Its
PMA side can get for you all the rich blessings of life. It can help
you to overcome your difficulties and to discover your strengths.
It can help you step out ahead of your competitors, and, as with
Kaiser, it can turn what others say is impossible into reality.
But the NMA side is just as powerful. Instead of happiness and
success, it can attract despair and defeat. Like all power, the
talisman is dangerous if we do not use it properly.
&
'(
There is a very interesting story,
which illustrates how the force of NMA repels. It comes out of
one of the southern states. There, where wood-burning fireplaces
are still used to heat homes, lived a woodcutter who also was an
unsuccessful person. For more than two years, he had supplied a
certain homeowner with firewood. The woodcutter knew that the
logs could not be larger than seven inches in diameter if they
were to fit this particular fireplace.
On one occasion this old customer ordered a cord of wood, but
was away when it was delivered. On arriving home he discovered
that most of the wood was larger than the specified size. He
called the woodcutter and asked him to have the oversized logs
exchanged or split.



"I can't do that!" said the wood dealer. "It would cost more than
the whole load is worth." With that he hung up.
So the homeowner was left with the job of splitting the logs
himself. He rolled up his sleeves and set to work. About halfway
through the job he noticed that one particular log had a very large
knothole which someone had plugged up. The homeowner lifted
the log. It seemed unusually light and appeared to be hollow.
With a hefty swing of the axe he split the log.
A blackened roll of tin foil fell out. The homeowner stooped
down, picked up the roll and unwrapped it. To his amazement it
contained very old $ and $ bills. Slowly he counted them.
They amounted to exactly $,. The bills had evidently been in
the tree for many years, as the paper was very brittle. The
homeowner had PMA. His only thought was to get the money
back to its rightful owner. He picked up the telephone, called the
wood dealer again, and asked him where he had cut this load.
Again the woodcutter's NMA asserted its repelling power. That's
nobody's business but mine," he said. "If you give away your
secrets, people will cheat you every time." Despite many efforts,
the homeowner never learned where the logs came from or who
had sealed the money inside.
Now, the point of this story does not lie in irony. It is true that the
man with PMA found the money while the man with NMA had
not. But it is also true that good breaks do occur in everyone's
life. However, the man who lives with NMA will prevent life's
lucky breaks from benefiting him. And the man with PMA will
so arrange his attitudes that he will turn even the bad breaks into
advantages.
On the sales staff of the Combined Insurance Company of
America there was a salesman named Al Allen. Al wanted to be
the company's star salesman. He tried to apply the PMA


principles found in the inspirational books and magazines he
read. He read an editorial in Success Unlimited magazine entitled
"Develop Inspirational Dissatisfaction." It wasn't long after that
he had an opportunity to put into practice what he had read. He
had a bad break. This gave him the opportunity to arrange his
attitudes so that he could use the PMA side of his talisman
effectively.
&
One icy winter
day Al "cold-canvassed" every store in a city block in Wisconsin;
he walked in unannounced, and tried to sell insurance. On that
day, Al did not make a single sale. Of course, he was dissatisfied.
But Al’s PMA turned this dissatisfaction into "inspirational
dissatisfaction."
Why?
He remembered the editorial he had read. He applied the
principle. The next day before setting out from the local office, he
told his fellow salesmen about his failures the day before. He
said, "Wait and see. Today I'm going back to call on those same
prospects and I'll sell more insurance than all the rest of you
combined!"
And the remarkable thing is that Al did it. He went back to that
same city block and again called on every person he had talked to
the day before. He sold  new accident contracts!
Now, this was an unusual achievement. And it happened because
of the "bad breaks" when Al trudged through the sleet and wind
for eight hours without selling a single policy. Al Allen was able
to rearrange his attitudes. He was able to convert the negative
kind of dissatisfaction that most of us would feel in similar
circumstances of failure on one day into inspirational
dissatisfaction, which resulted in success the next day. Al did


become the company's best salesman and was promoted to a sales
manager. This ability to turn the invisible talisman over and use
the side which has the force of PMA rather than the side which
has the force of NMA is characteristic of so many of our really
successful people. Most of us are inclined to look upon success as
coming in some mysterious way through advantage that we do
not have. Perhaps because we do have them, we don't see them.
The obvious is often unseen. Every man's PMA is his advantage,
and there is nothing mysterious about it.
Henry Ford, after he had achieved success, was the subject of
much envy. People felt that because of good fortune, or
influential friends, or genius, or whatever they thought was Ford's
"Secret" — because of these things Ford was successful. And no
doubt some of these elements played a part. But there was
something more. Perhaps one person in every hundred thousand
knew the real reason for Ford's success, and those few were
usually ashamed to speak of it because of its simplicity. A single
glimpse of Ford in action will illustrate the "secret" perfectly.
Years ago, Henry Ford decided to develop the now famous motor
known as V-. He wanted to build an engine with the entire eight
cylinders cast in one block. He instructed his engineers to
produce a design for such an engine. To a man, the engineers
agreed that it was simply impossible to cast an eight-cylinder
gasoline engine block in one piece.
Ford said, "Produce it anyway."
"But," they replied, "it's impossible."
"Go to work," Ford commanded, "and stay on the job until you
succeed no matter how much time is required."



The engineers went to work. There was nothing else for them to
do if they were to remain on the Ford staff. Six months went by
and they had not succeeded. Another six months passed, and still
no success. The more the engineers tried, the more the thing
seemed "impossible."
At the end of the year, Ford checked with his engineers. Once
again they informed him that they had found no way to carry out
his orders. "Keep working," said Ford. "I want it and I'll have it."
And what happened?
Well, of course, the engine wasn't impossible at all. The Ford V-
became the most spectacularly successful car on the road, pulling
Henry Ford and his company so far out in front of his nearest
competitor that it took years for them to catch up. He was using
PMA. And the same power is available to you. If you use it, if
you turn your talisman to the right side as Henry Ford did, you
too can achieve success in bringing into reality the possibility of
the improbable. If you know what you want, you can find a way
to get it.
A man of  has before him some , working hours should
he retire at . How many of your working hours will be alive
with the magnificent force of PMA? And how many of them will
have the life knocked out of them with the stunning blows of
NMA?
But how do you go about putting PMA to work in your life rather
than NMA? Some people seem to use this power instinctively.
When it came to developing the Ford car, Henry Ford was one of
these. Others have to learn. Al Allen learned by relating and
assimilating what he read in inspirational magazines and books.
Success Through a Positive Mental Attitude is such a book.



You, too, can learn to develop PMA.
Some people use PMA for a while but when they receive a
setback, they lose faith in it. They start out right, but some "bad
breaks" cause them to flip the talisman wrong-side-up. They fail
to realize that success is maintained by those who keep trying
with PMA. They are like the famous old racehorse "John P.
Grier." John P. Grier was a thoroughbred of great promise, such
promise in fact that he was groomed, trained and billed as the
only horse that stood a chance of beating the greatest racehorse of
all time Man o' War.
) *
+
,
In the
Dwyer Stakes at Aqueduct in July of , the two horses finally
met. It was a magnificent day. All eyes were riveted on the
starting post. The two horses got away evenly. Down the track
they went side by side. It was clear that John P. Grier was giving
Man o' War the race of his life. At the quarter mark they were
even. The half mark. The three-quarter mark and still they were
even. At the eighth pole — neck and neck. Then in the stretch
John P. Grier brought the crowd to its feet. Slowly he edged
ahead.
It was a moment of crisis for Man o' War's Jockey. He made up
his mind. For the first time in the great horse's career the jockey
nicked him solidly on the rump with his whip. Man o' War
reacted as though the jockey had set fire to his tail. He shot out
ahead and pulled away from John P. Grier as if the other horse
were standing still. At the end of the race Man o' War was seven
lengths ahead.
But the significant thing from our point of view was the effect of
defeat on the other horse. John P. Grier had been a horse of great
spirit; victory was in his attitude. But he was so broken by this
experience that he never really recovered. All of his races


afterwards were weak, half-hearted attempts and he never won
again.
People are not race horses, but this story is reminiscent of far too
many men who, in the boom years of the 's, started off with
a wonderful attitude of success. They achieved financial success,
and then, when the Depression struck in , they experienced
defeat. They were crushed. Their attitude changed from positive
to negative. Their talisman flipped to the side that read NMA.
They stopped trying. They, like John P. Grier, became "hasbeens."
Some people seem to use PMA pretty much all the time. Others
start and then quit. But others — the vast majority of us — have
never really begun to use the tremendous powers available to us.
What about us? Can we learn to use PMA, as we've learned other
skills?
The answer, based on our years of experience, is a definite yes.
This is the subject of this book. In the chapters that follow we
will show you how it can be done. The effort to learn will be
worth it because PMA is the essential ingredient in all success.
(
The day you recognize
PMA for yourself is the day that you will meet the most
important living person! Who is he? Why, the most important
living person is you, as far as you and your life are concerned
Take a look at yourself. Isn't it true that you carry with you an
invisible talisman with the initials PMA emblazoned on one side
and NMA on the other? What exactly is this talisman, this force?
The talisman is your mind PMA is a Positive Mental Attitude.



A Positive Mental Attitude is the right mental attitude. What is
the right mental attitude? It is most often comprised of the "plus"
characteristics symbolized by such words as faith, integrity, hope,
optimism, courage, initiative, generosity, tolerance, tact,
kindliness and good common sense. A person with positive
mental attitude aims for high goals and constantly strives to
achieve them.
NMA is a negative mental attitude. It has opposite characteristics
to PMA.
After years spent studying successful men, the authors of Success
Through a Positive Mental Attitude have come to the conclusion
that a positive mental attitude is the one simple secret shared by
them all.
It was PMA that helped S. B. Fuller overcome the disadvantages
of poverty. It was PMA that motivated Tom Dempsey, despite his
crippled leg, to kick the longest field goal ever kicked in a
professional football game. And it was certainly a positive mental
attitude that enabled Henry J. Kaiser to build a Liberty Ship every
ten days. It was Al Allen's ability to turn his talisman right-sideup that motivated him to return to his prospects — the very ones
who had refused him the day before — and set a new sales
record.
Do you know how to make your invisible talisman work for you?
Perhaps you do perhaps you don't. Perhaps you have developed
and strengthened your PMA until life is bringing you every
worthwhile wish. But if you haven't, you can and will learn the
techniques whereby you can release your power of PMA through
its magic in your life as you continue to read this book.
A positive mental attitude, what it is, and how it may be
developed and applied, is described throughout this book. It is the


one essential principle of this book's Seventeen Principles for
achieving worthwhile success. Achievement is attained through
some combination of PMA with one or more of the other sixteen
success principles Master them. Begin applying each of them as
you recognize them while reading Success Through a Positive
Mental Attitude, When you make each principle a part of your
life, yours will be a positive mental attitude in its most powerful
form. And the payoff will be success, health, happiness, wealth,
or whatever definite aims you may have in life. These will be
yours — provided you don't violate the laws of Infinite
Intelligence and the rights of your fellow men. Such violations
are the most repellent forms of NMA.
In  Two you will find the formula by which you may
keep your mind positive. Master that formula; apply it in all that
you do and you will be on your way to the attainment of your
every desire.
-. '. /

*= %

!


A= !
!

!

#
! =" ##

)

#

,)

!

=

! =)
C
C

!


=)

!

.% B
 $% B
#
=
/
#
= $%
!= /
! '
#

=
(

D " #

/

!

=


,

E= &

;=

!

'

'

= = 
= '

(

= ' = = 
= " #,
" #,





'
=

D &

'

&

,
!"

#
! !

!
)!& !

=
(

D

'

!

!

#

,
>=

$

%
' "

D

/= F
= -



#

.% =
(

D

#

.%

',

+= $

!
=/
(
.% ,

'
D .%

G= #

#
'

!

=" #

/

!
.% =

!

'

=



@
=" #
,



'

H= 
.% =
% '
&

!
 "

(
'



&

D"

!
,

*<= &

!

! '

!

#

(

=

!


(!

D
%

)

#

.

. (

=
' $

-

' $- ,( .

' -$



=
!
=

#
!

#
)
%

#

'

!



.% =
!
===

===

=

#

#



=

'

CHAPTER 
You Can Change Your World
We now know that PMA is a positive mental attitude. And we
also know that a Positive Mental Attitude is one of the  success
principles. When you begin to apply a combination of these
principles with PMA in your chosen occupation or to a solution
of your personal problems, you are on the road to success. Then
you are on the right track and headed in the right direction
towards getting what you want.
To achieve anything worthwhile in life, it is imperative that you
apply PMA, regardless of what other success principles you
employ. PMA is the catalyst which makes any combination of
success principles work to attain a worthwhile end. It is NMA,
combined with some of the same principles, that is the catalyst
which results in crime or evil. And grief, disaster, tragedy — sin,
disease, death — are some of its rewards.
/
The authors have for many years given
lectures, instructed classes, and conducted a correspondence
course on the  success principles. The title of the course PMA,
The Science of Success. These  principles are
. A Positive Mental Attitude
. Definiteness of purpose
. Going the extra mile
. Accurate thinking
. Self-discipline
. The master mind
. Applied faith
. A pleasing personality
. Personal initiative
. Enthusiasm

. Controlled attention
. Teamwork
. Learning from defeat
. Creative vision
. Budgeting time and money
. Maintaining sound physical
and mental health
. Using cosmic habit force
(universal law)



These  success principles are no creation of the authors. They
were extracted from the lifetime experiences of hundreds of the
most successful persons our nation has known during the past
century.
As long as you live, from this day forward, you can analyze your
every success and every failure — that is, if you imprint these 
principles indelibly in your memory.
You may develop and maintain a permanent Positive Mental
Attitude by making it your responsibility to adopt and apply these
 principles in your daily living.
There is no other known method by which you may keep your
mind positive.
Analyze yourself courageously, now, and learn which of these 
principles you have been using and which of them you have been
neglecting.
In the future analyze both your successes and your allures, using
the  principles as a measuring device, and very soon you will
be able to lay your finger on what has been holding you back.
If you have PMA and don't succeed, then what? If you use PMA
and don't succeed, it may be because you are not using each of
the principles that are necessary in the combination for success to
attain your specific goal.
You may wish to check the stories of S. B. Fuller, Tom Dempsey,
Henry J. Kaiser, the woodcutter, Al Allen, and Henry Ford, to
recognize which of the  success principles each person applied
or neglected to apply. You might analyze someone you know
who is a has-been in real life. As you read the case histories in the
chapters which follow, do the same thing. Ask yourself Which of


the  success principles are used? Which are omitted? At first it
may be difficult to understand and apply the principles. But as
you continue to read Success Through a Positive Mental Attitude,
each of these principles will become more clear to you. You will
then be able to use them. When you get to  O, you will
be able to check yourself accurately by the  success principles.
There you will find a self-analysis chart under the heading
"Success Quotient Analysis."
&
 The students who have
enrolled in the PMA Science of Success course have often been
people who considered themselves failures in some area of their
lives. The very first question such a person might be asked when
he enters the class is Why? Why are you taking this course? Why
haven't you had the success you would like to have? And the
reasons which they give tell us a tragic story about the causes of
failure.
"I never really had a chance to get ahead. My father was an
alcoholic, you know."
"I was raised in the slums and that's something you can never get
out of your system."
"I only had a grammar school education."
These people are all saying, in essence, that the world has given
them a raw deal. They are blaming the world and circumstances
outside themselves for their failures. They blame their heredity or
their environment. They start out with a negative mental attitude.
And, of course, with that attitude, they are handicapped But it is
NMA that is holding them down, not the external handicap which
they give as the cause of their failure.



There is a wonderful little story
about a minister who, one Saturday morning, was trying to
prepare his sermon under difficult conditions. His wife was out
shopping. It was a rainy day and his young son was restless and
bored, with nothing to do. Finally, in desperation, the minister
picked up an old magazine and thumbed through it until he came
to a large brightly colored picture. It showed a map of the world.
He tore the page from the magazine, ripped it into little bits and
threw the scraps all over the living room floor with the words
"Johnny, if you can put this all together, I'll give you a quarter''.
The preacher thought this would take Johnny most of the
morning. But within ten minutes there was a knock on his study
door. It was his son with the completed puzzle. The minister was
amazed to see Johnny finished so soon, with the pieces of paper
neatly arranged and the nap of the world back in order. 'Son, how
did you get that done so fast?" the preacher asked.
"Oh," said Johnny, "it was easy. On the other side, there was a
picture of a man. I just put a piece of paper on the bottom, put the
picture of the man together, put a piece of paper on top, and then
turned it over. I figured that if got the man right, the world would
be right."
The minister smiled, and handed his son a quarter. "And you've
given me my sermon for tomorrow, too," he said. "If a man is
right, his world will be right."
There's a great lesson in this idea. If you are unhappy with your
world and want to change it, the place to start is with yourself. If
you are right, your world will be right. This is what PMA is all
about. When you have a Positive Mental Attitude, the problems
of your world tend to bow before you.




Have you ever thought about the
battles you won before you were born? "Stop and think about
yourself," says Amram Scheinfeld, an expert on genetics. "In all
the history of the world there was never anyone else exactly like
you, and in all the infinity of time to come, there will never be
another."
You are a very special person. And many struggles took place
that had to be successfully concluded in order to produce you.
Just think tens of millions of sperm cells participated in a great
battle, yet only one of them won — the one that made you! It was
a great race to reach a single object a precious egg containing a
tiny nucleus. This goal for which the sperms were competing was
smaller in size than the point of a needle. And each sperm was so
small that it would have to be magnified thousands of times
before it could be seen by the human eye. Yet it is on this
microscopic level that your life's most decisive battle was fought.
The head of each of the millions of sperms contained a precious
cargo of  chromosomes, just as there were  in the tiny
nucleus of the egg. Each chromosome was composed of jelly-like
beads closely strung together. Each bead contained hundreds of
genes to which scientists attribute all the factors of your heredity.
The chromosomes in the sperm comprised aft the hereditary
material and tendencies contributed by your father and his
ancestors; those in the egg-nucleus the inheritable traits of your
mother and her ancestors. Your mother and father themselves
represented the culmination of over two billion years of victory in
the battle to survive. And then one particular sperm — the fastest,
the healthiest, the winner — united with the waiting egg to form
one, tiny living cell.
The life of the most important living person had begun. You had
become a champion over the most staggering odds you will ever


have to face. For all practical purpose you had inherited from the
vast reservoir of the past all the potential abilities and powers you
need to achieve you objectives.
You were born to be a champion, and no matter what obstacles
and difficulties lie in your way, they are not one tenth so great as
the ones that have already been overcome at the moment of your
conception. Victory is built in to every living person. Take the
case of Irving Ben Cooper who was one of America's most
respected judges. But this was very far from the way young Ben
Cooper thought of himself as a young boy.
&
( Ben grew up in a nearslum neighborhood in St. Joseph, Missouri. His father was an
immigrant tailor who earned little money. Many days there
simply wasn't enough to eat. To heal their small home, Ben used
to take a coal scuttle, and walk down to the railroad tracks that
ran nearby. There he would pick up pieces of coal. It embarrassed
Ben to have to do it. He'd often try to sneak through the bad
streets so children from school wouldn't see him.
But they often did. There was one gang of boys in particular who
found great sport in ambushing Ben on his way home from the
tracks and beating him up. They would scatter his coal all over
the street and send him home with tears streaming from his eyes.
Thus it was that Ben lived in a more or less permanent state of
fear and self-despising.
Something happened, as it always must when we break the
pattern of defeat. The victory within us does not assert itself until
we are ready. Ben was inspired to positive action because he read
a book. It was Robert Coverdale's Struggle by Horatio Alger.



In it Ben read the adventures of a youngster like himself who was
faced with great odds, but who overcame these odds with the
courage and moral strength which Ben wished to possess.
The boy read every one of the Horatio Alger books he could
borrow. As he read, he lived the part of the hero. All winter he sat
in the cold kitchen reading stories of courage and success,
unconsciously absorbing a Positive Mental Attitude.
Some months after he had read his first Horatio Alger book, Ben
Cooper was again making a trip down to the railroad tracks. Off
in the distance he saw three figures dart behind a building. His
first thought was to turn and run. Then he remembered the
courage that he had admired in his book heroes, and, instead of
turning, his hand gripped the coal scuttle more tightly and he
marched straight ahead, as if he were one of the Alger heroes.
It was a brutal fight. The three boys jumped Ben all at the same
time. His bucket dropped, and he started flailing his arms with a
determination that caught the bullies by surprise. Ben's right hand
smashed into the lips and nose of one of the boys — his left hand
into his stomach. To Ben's surprise, the boy stopped fighting and
turned and ran. Meanwhile the other two boys were hitting and
kicking him. Ben managed to push one boy away and knock the
other down. He jumped on the second boy with his knees, while
he plowed punch after punch into his stomach and jaw — as if he
were mad. Now there was just one boy left. This was the leader.
He had jumped on top of Ben. Ben managed to pull him aside
and get on his feet. For a second the two boys stood and looked
each other squarely in the eyes.
And then, bit by bit, the leader stepped backwards. He, too, ran
away. Perhaps it was righteous indignation, but Ben picked up a
chunk of coal and threw it at the retreater.



It wasn't until then that Ben realized that his nose was bleeding
and that he had black and blue marks on his body from the
punches and kicks he had received. It was worth it! It was a great
day in Ben's life. In that moment he overcame fear.
Ben Cooper wasn't much stronger than he had been a year earlier.
His attackers were no less tough. The difference came in Ben's
own mental attitude. He had faced danger in spite of fear. He
decided that no longer was he going to be pushed around by
bullies. From now on, he himself was going to change his world.
And, of course, this is exactly what he did.
The boy gave himself
an identity. When he fought the three bullies on the street that
day, he was not lighting as frightened, undernourished Ben
Cooper. He was fighting as Robert Coverdale or any other of the
plucky and daring heroes of Horatio Alger's books.
Identifying one's self with a successful image can help break the
habits of self-doubt and defeat which years of NMA set up within
a personality. Another and equally important successful technique
for changing your world is to identify yourself with an image that
will inspire you to make the right decisions. It can be a slogan, a
picture, or any other symbol that is meaningful to you.
The president of a midwest
concern operating internationally was visiting his San Francisco
office. He noticed a large photograph of himself on the wall of
the office of Dorothy Jones, a private secretary. "Dotti, that's a
rather large picture for this size room, isn't it?" he asked.
Dorothy responded, "When I have a problem, do you know what
I do?" Without waiting for an answer, she demonstrated by
placing her elbows on her desk, propping her head on the fingers



of her folded hands, and looking up at the picture. "Boss, how the
heck would you solve this problem?" she asked.
Dotti's remarks seem rather humorous. Yet the essence of her
idea is startling. Perhaps you have a picture in your office, your
home, or in your wallet, that could give you the right answer to
an important question in your life. Yours may be a picture of your
mother, father, wife, husband — of Benjamin Franklin or
Abraham Lincoln. It may be that of a saint.
What will your picture say to you? There is one way to find out.
When you are faced with a serious problem or decision, ask your
picture a question. Listen, for the answer.
Another essential ingredient for changing your world is to have
definiteness of purpose, one of the  principles of success.
)
Definiteness of purpose, combined with PMA, is
the starting point of all worthwhile achievement Remember —
your world will change whether or not you choose to change it.
But you have the power to choose its direction. You can select
your own targets. When you determine your definite major aims
with PMA, there is a natural tendency for you to use seven of the
success principles
BC.
BC (
BC
B C

BC
BC
BC
!

'
!

B
!

C

Robert Christopher had definiteness of purpose with PMA.


Now, let's see how the natural tendencies for these additional
principles manifested themselves in this success story. For, like
many boys, Bob's imagination was stimulated while he read Jules
Verne's thrilling, imaginative story Around the World in  Days.
Bob told us
"I used to daydream a great deal but when I grew older, I read
two books on motivation Think and Grow Rich and The Magic of
Believing.
"Around the world in  days. Now, why couldn't I go around the
world on $.? I believed that any given aim could be
accomplished if I had faith and confidence that it could be. That
is if I started from where I was to get to where I wanted to be.
"I thought 'Others had worked on freighters to earn their
transatlantic passages and hitchhiked all over the world, so why
couldn't I?'"
And then Bob took his fountain pen from his pocket and wrote on
a piece of note paper a list of the problems with which he would
be faced. Also, he made notes of what he thought were workable
answers to each.
Now Bob Christopher was an expert photographer and he did
have a camera. It was a good one at that. When he reached his
decision, he went into action
BC

#
!

!
BC
!




!
=


. !
!
=
%


!

BC. '

!

BC 
&

=
!

$ # - ' 
!

!

BC

-

"

% !

BC 

.
=

=

#

!
!

#

!

=
And when his plans were completed, this young man of  left
New York City by plane with $. in his pocket Around the
world on $. was his definite major aim. And here are a few
of his experiences
"

'

$ #

,"
#

=" #
'
=

'
=



!

/



! ;=G<=
!
!

!


! .

!

#
!

=

= )

=
'
!

# 

@

& !

=

' !=



'
=
! /
'

#
!

!

) '

/
)

!

!
=

)

/  ' '
' =  

= )

!

#

! '
!

!I

!


#
!

=
#! !

(
Around the world in  days? No — Robert Christopher went
around the world in  days. But he did accomplish his objective.
He went around the world on $.
And because he had definiteness of purpose with PMA, he was
automatically motivated to use an additional  of the  success
principles to achieve his specific goal.
. Let us repeat The
starting point of all achievement is definiteness of purpose with
PMA. Remember this statement and ask yourself, what is my
goal? What do I really want?
Based on the people we see in our PMA Science of Success
course, we estimate that  out of every  persons who are
dissatisfied with their world do not have a clear picture in their
minds of the world they would like for themselves.
Think of it! Think of the people who drift aimlessly through life,
dissatisfied, struggling against a great many things, but without a
clear-cut goal. Can you state, right now, what it is that you want
out of life? Fixing your goals may not be easy. It may even
involve some painful self-examination. But it will be worth
whatever effort it costs, because as soon as you can name your


goal, you can expect to enjoy many advantages. These
advantages come almost automatically.
. The first great advantage is that your subconscious mind
begins to work under a universal law "What the mind of
man can conceive and believe — the mind of man can
achieve with PMA." Because you visualize your intended
destination, your subconscious mind is affected by this
self-suggestion. It goes to work to help you get there.
. Because you know what you want, there is a tendency for
you to try to get on the right track and head in the right
direction. You get into action.
. Work now becomes fun. You are motivated to pay the
price. You budget your time and money. You study, think,
and plan. The more you think about your goals, the more
enthusiastic you become. And with enthusiasm your desire
turns into a burning desire.
. You become alerted to opportunities that will help you
achieve your objectives as they present themselves in your
everyday experiences. Because you know what you want,
you are more likely to recognize these opportunities.
These four advantages are illustrated by an early experience of
the man who was later to become editor of the Ladies Home
Journal. Edward Bok came from Holland as a boy with his
parents. He was imbued with the idea that some day he was going
to run a magazine. With this specific goal before him, he was able
to seize upon an incident so trivial that with most of us it would
have passed unnoticed.
He saw a man open a package of cigarettes, take a slip of paper
from it, and drop the paper on the floor. Bok stooped and picked


up the scrap of paper. On it was a picture of a famous actress.
Below the picture was a statement that this was one of a series.
The cigarette buyer was urged to collect the complete set of
pictures. Bok turned the piece of paper over and noticed that the
back side was perfectly blank.
Bok's mind, filled as it was with a purpose, sensed an opportunity
here. He reasoned that the value of the picture enclosed in the
package of cigarettes would be greatly enhanced if the blank side
were devoted to a brief biography of the person pictured. He went
to the lithograph firm, which printed the enclosure and explained
his idea to the manager. The manager promptly said
I'll give you ten dollars each if you will write me a -word
biography of  famous Americans. Send me a list, and group
them — you know presidents, famous soldiers, actors, authors,
and so on."
This is the way Edward Bok got his first literary assignment. The
demand for his short biographies became so great that he needed
help, so he offered his brother five dollars each if he would help
him. Before long, Bok had five journalists busy turning out
biographies for the lithograph presses. Bok — he was the editor!

Notice that none of the men we
have been talking about had success handed to him on a platter.
At first the world was not particularly kind to Edward Bok or
Judge Cooper. And yet each carved from the raw material around
him a career of great satisfaction. And each one did it by
developing the many talents he found within himself.
$
It is interesting to note that life never leaves us
stranded. If life hands us a problem, it hands us also the abilities
with which to meet the problem. Our abilities vary, of course, as


we are motivated to use them. And even though you are in ill
health, you can nonetheless lead a useful and happy life.
You may fear ill health is too great a handicap to overcome. If
this is true, take courage from the experience of Milo C. Jones.
Milo had not tried to acquire wealth when he had good health.
And then he became sick. When he became sick, the odds were
stacked heavily against him.
Here's the story of his experience.
When Milo C. Jones had been in good health he had worked very
hard. He was a farmer and he operated a small farm near Fort
Atkinson, Wisconsin. But somehow he seemed unable to make
his farm yield much more than the bare necessities for himself
and his family. This kind of existence went on year after year.
Then suddenly something happened!
Jones was stricken with extensive paralysis and confined to his
bed. Here was a man who late in life became completely
incapacitated. He was barely able to move his body. His relatives
were certain he would be permanently unhappy as a hopeless
invalid. And he would have been had not something more
happened to him. And he made it happen. It brought the kind of
happiness to him that comes with achievement and financial
success.
What was it Jones used to bring about this change? He used his
mind. Yes, his body was paralyzed. But his mind was unaffected.
He could think and he did think and plan. One day while engaged
in thinking and planning, he recognized the most important living
person with the magic talisman with PMA on one side and NMA
on the other. He saw clearly that he was a mind with a body. He
made his own decision right then and there!



(
Milo C. Jones chose to develop a positive
mental attitude. He chose to be hopeful, optimistic, happy and to
convert creative thinking into reality by starting right from where
he was. He wanted to be useful. And be wanted to support his
family, instead of being a burden to them. But how could he turn
his disadvantage into advantage? He didn't let this vital problem
stop him. He found the answer.
First, Jones counted his blessings. He discovered that he had so
very much for which to be thankful. This thankfulness led him to
search for additional blessings which he might enjoy in the
future. And because he was searching for, among other things, a
way to be useful, he found and recognized that for which he was
looking. It was a plan and it required action.
So Jones went into mental action.
He revealed the plan to members of his family.
"I am no longer able to work with my hands," he began, "so I
have decided to work with my mind. Every one of you can, if you
will, take the place of my hands, feet, and physical body. Let's
plant every tillable acre of out farm in corn. Then let's raise pigs
and feed them the corn. Let's slaughter the pigs while they are
young and tender and convert them into sausages. And then we
can package and sell them under a brand name. We'll sell them in
retail stores all over the country." And then he chuckled as he
said
"They'll sell like hot cakes!"
And they did sell like hot cakes! In a few years the brand name
"Jones" Little Pig Sausages" became a household byword. And
these four words became a symbol that tantalized the appetites of
men, women, and children throughout the nation.


And Milo C. Jones lived to see himself a millionaire. He had
achieved something even more through a positive mental attitude.
For he bad flipped his talisman to PMA. And thus although he
was physically handicapped, he became a happy man.
He was happy because he was useful.
A formula to help you change your world. Fortunately not every
life is faced with such great difficulties. Yet everyone has
problems. And everyone reacts to motivating symbols through
suggestion or self-suggestion. A most effective form is a selfmotivator deliberately memorized for the purpose of flashing
from the subconscious to the conscious in time of need.
What, then, is a formula that can help you change your world?
Memorize, understand, and repeat frequently throughout the day
What the mind of man can conceive and believe, the mind of man
can achieve with PMA. It is a form of self-suggestion. It is a selfmotivator to success. When it becomes a part of you, you dare to
aim higher.
Bill was a sickly farm boy in the southeastern Missouri country.
A dedicated grammar school teacher motivated young William
Danforth to change his world. The teacher did this with a
challenge I Dare You! "I dare you to become the healthiest boy
in school!" I Dare You! became William Danforth's selfmotivator throughout life.
He became the healthiest boy in his school. Before he died at the
age of , he helped thousands of other youths develop good
health — and something more to aspire nobly, to adventure
daringly, and to serve humbly. During his long career be never
lost a day at work because of illness.



I Dare You! motivated him to build one of America's largest
corporations. The Ralston Purina Company. I Dare You!
motivated him to engage in creative thinking and turn liabilities
into assets. I Dare You! motivated him to organize The American
Youth Foundation its purpose is to train young men and women
in Christian ideals and to prepare them for the responsibilities of
life.
I Dare You! motivated William Danforth to write a book entitled
I Dare You! Today this book is inspiring boys and girls, men and
women, to have the courage to make this world a better world to
live in.
What a remarkable testimony to the power of a self-motivator to
develop a positive mental attitude!
Are you, yourself, ever tempted to blame the world for your
failures? If so, pause and reconsider. Does the problem lie with
the world, or with you? Dare to learn the  success principles!
Dare to memorize self-motivators! Dare to apply them with the
full assurance that they will work for you just as effectively as
they are working every day for hundreds of others.
Perhaps you don’t know how. Perhaps you need to learn to think
mere accurately. Be guided by Pilot No. .
Then turn to  Three. Its purpose is to help you — clear the
cobwebs from your thinking.
-. '. 

. You can change your world! To achieve anything worthwhile
in life it is necessary to set high goals for yourself and want to


achieve them. Have you thought about the high goals you
would like to achieve?
. Imprint the  success principles indelibly in your memory.
Have you memorized them?
. Do you tend to "blame the world"? If you do, memorize the
self-motivator If the man is right, his world will be right. Is
your immediate world right?
. You were born to be a champion. For all practical purposes,
you have inherited from the vast reservoir of the past all the
potential abilities and powers you need to achieve your
objectives. Are you willing to pay the price to develop your
abilities and use the powers within you?
. Identify yourself with a successful image, as Irving Ben
Cooper did. Who will you select?
. Ask yourself an important question What will your picture say
to you? Listen for the answer.
. Definiteness of purpose with PMA is the starting point of all
worthwhile achievement. Have you selected some definite,
specific, desirable goal? Will you keep it in mind daily?
. When you determine your definite aims, there is a tendency for
several additional success principles to begin to operate
automatically to help you achieve them.
. Everyone has many talents for surmounting his special
problems. What special talents do you think you have that you
can develop?



. Here is a formula that has helped many to change their world
What the mind of man can conceive and believe the mind of
man can achieve with PMA. Have you memorized this
formula?
A POSITIVE MENTAL ATTITUDE AND
DEFINITENESS OF PURPOSE IS THE
STARTING POINT TOWARD ALL
WORTHWHILE ACHIEVEMENT!



CHAPTER 
Clear the Cobwebs from Your Thinking
You are what you think. But what do you think? How orderly are
your thought processes? How straight is your thinking?
And how clean are your thoughts?
There are certain mental cobwebs that clutter up the thinking of
almost everyone, even the most brilliant minds. Negative
feelings, emotions, passions — habits, beliefs and prejudices. Our
thoughts become entangled in these webs.
Sometimes we have undesirable habits and we want to correct
them. And there are times when we are strongly tempted to do
wrong. Then, like an insect caught in a spider's web, we struggle
to get free. Our conscious will is in conflict with our imagination
and the will of our subconscious mind. The more we struggle, the
more we become entrapped.
Some persons give up and experience the mental conflicts of a
living hell. Others learn how to tap and use the powers of the
subconscious through the conscious mind. They are victorious.
And success through a positive mental attitude teaches you how
to tap and use these powers.
An insect may not be able to avoid being caught in the spider's
web. And when once trapped, it is unable to free itself. There is
one thing, however, over which each person has absolute,
inherent control, and that is his mental attitude. We can avoid
mental cobwebs. We can clear them. And we can sweep them
away as they begin to develop. We can free ourselves when once
enmeshed. And we can remain free.



You do this by accurate thinking with PMA. Accurate thinking is
one of the  success principles revealed in Success Through a
Positive Mental Attitude.
To think accurately you must use reason. The science of
reasoning or accurate thinking is called logic. One can learn it
from books written specifically on this subject, such as The Art
of Clear Thinking, by Rudolf Flesch; Your Most Enchanted
Listener, by Wendell Johnson; Introduction to Logic, by Irving
Copi; and The Art of Straight Thinking, by Edwin Leavitt Clarke.
These books can be of immense practical help.
But we don't act from reason alone. And action based on
common sense is the result of more than just reason. It depends
upon habits of thought and action, intuitions, experiences and
other influences such as tendencies and environment.
One of the cobwebs of our thinking is to assume that we act from
reason alone when in reality every conscious act is the result of
doing what we want to do. We make decisions. There is a
tendency, when reasoning, to draw conclusions favorable to the
strong inner urges of our subconscious mind. And this tendency
exists in everyone — even the great thinkers and philosophers.
In  B.C. a Greek philosopher who lived in a city on the Aegean
Sea wanted to go to Carthage. He was a teacher of logic;
therefore be contemplated reasons in favor of making the voyage
and reasons against it. For every reason as to why he should go
he found that there were many more reasons why he shouldn't. Of
course he would be seasick. The boat was so small that a storm
might jeopardize his life. Pirates with swift sailing vessels were
lying in wait off Tripoli to prey upon merchant vessels. If his ship
were captured by them, they would take his worldly goods and
sell him into slavery. Discretion indicated that he should not
make the trip.


But he did. Why? Because he wanted to.
It so happens that emotion and reason should be in balance in
everyone's life. Neither should always hold the controlling hand.
So sometimes it is good to do what you want to do instead of
what reason fears. As to this philosopher — he had a most
pleasant journey and arrived back home safely.
Then there was Socrates, the great Athenian philosopher who
lived from  B.C. to  B.C. He has gone down in history as
one of the outstanding thinkers of all time. Wise as Socrates was,
there were cobwebs in his thinking too.
As a young man Socrates fell in love with Xanthippe. She was
very beautiful. He wasn't good looking, but he was persuasive.
Persuasive individuals seem to have the ability to get what they
want. Socrates was successful in persuading Xanthippe to marry
him.
*
After
the honeymoon was over, things didn't go along so well at his
house. His wife began to see his faults. And he saw hers. He was
motivated by egoism. He was selfish. She was always nagging
him. Socrates reportedly said, "My aim in life is to get on well
with people. I chose Xanthippe because I knew if I could get on
well with her, I could get along with anyone."
That is what he said. But his actions disproved his words. It is
questionable that he tried to get on well with more than a few.
When you always try to prove to persons whom you meet that
they are wrong, you repel rather than attract as Socrates did.
Yet he said that he endured Xanthippe's nagging for his own
personal self-discipline. But he would have developed real selfdiscipline had he tried to understand his wife and to influence her


through the same considerate attentions and expressions of love
that he used in persuading her to marry him. He didn't see the
beam in his own eye, but he saw the mote in Xanthippe's eye.
Of course, Xanthippe wasn't blameless either. Socrates and she
were just like many husbands and wives living today. After their
marriage they neglect to continue to communicate their true
feelings of affection, understanding, and love to each other. They
neglect to continue to employ the same pleasing personalities and
mental attitudes that made their courtship such a happy
experience. Negligence is a cobweb too.
Now Socrates didn't read Success Through a Positive Mental
Attitude. Neither did Xanthippe. Had she done so, she would have
known how to motivate her husband so that their home life would
have been a happier one. She would have seen the beam in her
eye, rather than the mote in Socrates'. She would have controlled
her own reactions and been sensitive to the reactions of her
husband. In fact, she might have even proved the fallacy of his
logic after she read  Five entitled ". . . And Something
More."
And because the story of Socrates proves he saw only mote in
Xanthippe's eye we shall tell you about another young man — he
learned to see the beam in his own eye. But before we do, let's
see how the habit of nagging develops.
You see, when you know the cause of a problem, you can often
avoid it or you can find your own solution to that problem if you
already have it.
S. I. Hayakawa in Language in Thought and Action wrote
/

B#
 #

!

!= "


C
#



!
!

! ! =$
!
!
!
# =)



#
=
#






 #
'J
!
=

Now what about the young man? It was the first evening of a
PMA Science of Success class when he was asked, "Why are you
taking this course?"
"Because of my wife!" he responded. Many of the students
laughed — but not the instructor. He knew from experience that
there are many unhappy homes when husband or wife sees the
other's faults but not his or her own.
&
. It was four weeks later in a
private conference that the instructor asked the student, "How are
you coming along with your problem?"
"It's solved!"
'That's wonderful! But how did you solve it?"
"I learned when  am faced with a problem that involves
misunderstandings with other persons, I must first start with
myself. When I examined my own mental attitude, I discovered
that it was negative. My problem was really not with my wife
after all — it was with me! In solving my problem I found that I
no longer had one will her."
Now, what if Socrates had said to himself "When I am faced
with a problem that involves a misunderstanding with Xanthippe,
I must first start with myself"? And what would happen if you
would say to yourself "When I am faced with a problem that


involves a misunderstanding with another person, I must first start
with myself'? Would you life be a happier one?
But there are many other cobwebs that interfere with happiness.
Oddly enough, the one that is the greatest hindrance is the very
tool of thought itself words. Words art symbols, as S. I.
Hayakawa tells us in his book. And you, will find that a one-word
symbol can mean to you the sum total of a combination of
innumerable ideas, concept, and experiences. And you will also
see as you continue to read Success Through a Positive Mental
Attitude that the subconscious instantaneously communicates to
the conscious mind through symbols.
Through one word you can motivate others to act. When you say
to another person "You can!" this is suggestion. When you say to
yourself "I can!" you motivate yourself by self-suggestion. But
more about these universal truths in the next chapter. First let's
recognize that a whole science has grown up around the
important discoveries made about words and the communicating
of ideas through words the science of semantics.
And Hayakawa is an expert in this field. He tells us that to find
out what a word really means on the lips of another person, or
even on your own lips, is essential in the process of accurate
thinking.
But how does one do this?
Just be specific. Start with a meeting of the minds and many
needless misunderstandings will be avoided.
.
= The uncle of a nine-year-old
boy was visiting in the home of the boy's parents. One evening
when the father came home, the following dialogue developed



"What do you think of a boy that lies?"
"I don't think very much of him, and I know one thing certain my
son tells the truth,"
"He told a lie today."
"Son, did you tell your uncle a lie?"
"No, father."
"Let's clear this thing up. Your uncle says you lied. You say you
didn't. Just exactly what did happen?" he asked, turning to the
uncle.
"Well, I told him to take his toys down to the basement. He didn't
do it, and he told me that he did."
"Son, did you take your toys to the basement?"
"Yes, father."
"Son, how do you explain this? Your uncle says that you didn't
take your toys to the basement and you say that you did."
"There are several steps leading from the first floor down to the
basement… About four steps down is a window… I put my toys
on the window sill... The basement is the distance between the
floor and the ceiling… My toys are in the basement!"
The argument between the uncle and his nephew was due to the
definition of one word basement. The boy probably knew what
his uncle meant, but he was lazy and hadn't wanted to run all the
way downstairs. When he was faced with punishment, the boy
tried to save himself by using logic to prove his point.


Now this may be intriguing. But more motivating will be the
story of a young man who didn't know what the most important
word symbol in any language means. And what is the most
important word in any language? That word is God.
Not so long ago a student from Columbia University called on the
Rev. Harry Emerson Fosdick, Minister Emeritus of The Riverside
Church of New York City. The student had hardly gotten through
the door before he said
"I am an atheist!" When he sat down, he repeated defiantly, "I
don't believe in God."
- *
= Now, fortunately, Dr.
Fosdick was also an expert in the field of semantics. He knew
from long experience that he could never really communicate
with another person unless he understood exactly what that other
person meant by the words he used. He also knew that it was
necessary for the other person to comprehend his meaning. So
instead of taking offense at the student's brash remark, Dr.
Fosdick expressed a genuinely friendly interest in him and then
asked, "Please describe to me the God you do not believe in."
The young man had to think, as everyone has to thick when he is
asked a question that doesn't cause a reflex "yes" or "no" answer.
Dr. Fosdick knew that the right question could sweep strong
cobwebs of negative thinking out of the youth's mind.
After a little while the student began to try to describe the God he
didn't believe in. In so doing he gave the minister a very clear
picture of the God he rejected.
"Well," said Dr. Fosdick when the student had finished, "if that is
the God you don't believe in, I don't believe in him either. So we
are both atheists. Nevertheless," he continued, "we still have the


universe on our hands. What do you make of it — its formation,
its meaning?"
Before the young man left Dr. Fosdick, he discovered that he was
not an atheist at all, but a very good theist. He did believe in God.
Now Dr. Fosdick had not been thrown by the undefined use of a
word. In this instance he helped sweep away the cobwebs of the
young man's thinking by asking him questions. The simple, clear
response as to what the young man didn't believe in was enough
to allow a meeting of the minds. The second question directed the
youth's thoughts into the proper channels. And it gave Dr.
Fosdick an opportunity to explain his meaning of the universal
God.
As we have seen, the student
reached two entirely different conclusions. Each was based on a
different premise. Cobwebs will interfere with accurate thinking
and cause you to reach a wrong conclusion when you start with a
false premise. W. Clement Stone had an amusing experience with
this which he describes as follows
/

?

= 

/ #

?!

!= )
=

/

!
F

/

/#
#

'
#

-

'
'

!

#

#

!

,

,/

'

#D


=



= %

-



/

!

-



! =


#

?!
!

/
=/#

#
D )

#

 

#



)

!

#

=
@

/
?

!

!

=

/

/ #

=
/

=

/



!

/

!
#

!

!
?!
#

!


!
=/ #
=/ #

/
= /


!

!
?!

!
#

=

Now we see that cobwebs prevent accurate thinking when we
start with the wrong premise. So many persons think inaccurately
when they allow all-embracing word symbols to clutter up their
minds with false premises. Such words or expressions as always
— only — never — nothing — every — everyone — no one —
can't — impossible — either… or — are most frequently false
premises. Consequently, when they are so used their logical
conclusions are false.



'
(
= Now there is
one word which, when used with PMA, motivates a person to
honorable achievement. When used with NMA, it becomes the
excuse for lies, deception, and fraud. Necessity is the word.
Necessity is the mother of invention and the father of crime.
Inviolable standards of integrity are fundamental to all
worthwhile achievement and are an integral part of PMA.
You will read many success stories throughout this book in which
persons are motivated by necessity. And in each case you'll find
that such persons achieved success without transgressing an
inviolable standard of integrity. Lee Braxton is such a man.
Lee Braxton, of Whiteville, North Carolina, was the son of a
struggling blacksmith. He was the tenth child in a family of
twelve. "... so you might say," says Mr. Braxton, "that I became
acquainted with poverty early in life. By hard work I managed to
get through the sixth grade in school. I shined shoes, delivered
groceries, sold news-papers, worked in a hosiery mill, washed
automobiles, and served as a mechanic's helper."
When he became a mechanic, it appeared to Lee that he r had
risen as far as he could go. Perhaps he had not yet developed
inspirational dissatisfaction. In due course he married. And
together he and his wife scrimped along. He was used to poverty.
And it now seemed to him that it was impossible for him to break
the ties which held him down, although he was poorly paid and
just barely supporting his family. The Braxtons were already
having a terrible time making ends meet when, to complete the
picture of defeat, he lost his job. His home was about to be taken
from him because he was unable to meet the mortgage payments.
It seemed a hopeless situation.



But Lee was a man of character. He was also a religions man.
And he believed that God is always a good God. So he prayed for
guidance. As if in answer to his prayer, he received the book
Think and Grow Rich from a friend. This friend had lost his job
and his home in the Depression. And he had been motivated to
recoup his fortune after reading Think and Grow Rich.
Now Lee was ready.
He read the book again and again. He was searching for financial
success. He said to himself "It seems to me there is something I
have to do. I have to add something, No book will do it for me.
The first thing I must do is develop a Positive Mental Attitude
regarding my abilities and my opportunities. I must certainly
choose a definite goal. When I do, I must aim higher than I have
in the past. But I must get started. I'll begin with the first job I can
find."
And he looked for a job and found one. It didn't pay much to
start.
But it wasn't many years after he had read Think and Grow Rich
that Lee Braxton organized and became president of the First
National Bank of Whiteville, was elected mayor of his city, and
engaged in many successful business enterprises. You see Lee
had aimed high — in fact, very high. He had taken as his major
purpose the goal of being rich enough to retire at the age of .
He achieved this goal six years ahead of time — retiring from
active business with substantial wealth and a fine independent
income at the age of . Today Lee Braxton is leading a useful
life. He is devoting his entire efforts to helping Oral Roberts, the
evangelist, in his ministry.
Now, the jobs that he took and the investments he made in
climbing from failure to success are not important here. What is


important is that necessity motivates a man with PMA to action
without transgressing recognized inviolable standards. An honest
man won't deceive, cheat, or steal because of necessity. Honesty
is inherent in PMA.
'
'(
Now, contrast such a man with the
many thousands of persons with NMA who are imprisoned
because of stealing, embezzling, or other crimes. When you ask
them why they stole in the first place, their answer invariably is
"I had to." And that's how they landed in prison! They allowed
themselves to become dishonest because cobwebs in their
thinking caused them to believe that necessity forces one to
become dishonest.
Some years ago, Napoleon Hill, while doing personal counseling
in the prison library in the federal penitentiary at Atlanta, had
several confidential talks with Al Capone. In one of these talks,
the author inquired "How did you get started in a life of crime?"
Capone answered with one word "Necessity."
Then tears came into his eyes and he choked up. He began to tell
of some of the good things he had done which the newspapers
had never mentioned. Of course, these seem insignificant
compared to the evil that is attributed to his name.
That unfortunate man wasted his life, destroyed his peace of
mind, undermined his physical body with deadly disease, and
spread fear and disaster in the path he followed — all because he
never learned to clear the cobwebs of his thinking regarding
necessity.
And when Capone told of his good deeds, which he implied
offset to some great degree the wrongs he had done, he clearly
indicated another cobweb which was preventing him from


thinking accurately. While a man can neutralize the evil he has
done by true repentance followed by a life of good deeds, Capone
was not such a man.
But there was such a man. He was a teen-age problem child. Yet
his mother never lost hope even though many of her specific
prayers for him seemed unanswered. And she never lost faith,
regardless of her son's escapades or wrongdoing.
He was a teen-age problem child. This young man became an
educated, intellectual, passionate, and sensual teen-age problem
child. He took pride in being first, even in evil. It is said that he
disobeyed his parents and teachers, lied and deceived, committed
petty thefts, cheated in gambling, indulged in alcoholic and
sexual excesses.
Yet because of his mother's constant and earnest picas to him to
mend his ways, he struggled to find himself even before he
reached the lowest point in his moral life. Sometimes he was
filled with shame by the knowledge that men with less education
were able to resist temptations which he thought he was
powerless to resist. And because he was educated, and because he
was searching, he studied the Bible and other inspirational books
of his day.
Even so, he lost many battles with himself. And then one day be
won the battle that turned the tide to personal victory. This is
what happens when a person keeps trying. It was during a period
of remorse when he was overcome with self-condemnation that
he overheard a conversation in which one voice said, "Take up
and read!"
He reached for the nearest book, opened it, and read "Let us
walk honestly, as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not
in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying. But put


ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh,
to fulfill the lusts thereof."
It often happens. After a person suffers a serious defeat in a
personal battle with himself, he may at that point be ready. His
remorse can be so emotional and sincere that he is motivated to
take immediate action and through perseverance make the change
that keeps him on the road to j a complete victory.
Now this young man was ready!
And once he made his irrevocable decision, he had peace of
mind. He believed that Divine Power would help him overcome
the sins which he had previously fought in vain and he developed
a deep spirituality. His subsequent life proved this by results. The
young man devoted himself to God and the service of his
fellowmen.
It is because of what he had been and what he became that he is
considered a man who has had a most powerful influence in
giving hope even to the hopeless. Augustine was his name. And
he was made a saint.
It is well known that the power of the Bible has been instrumental
in changing even the attitudes of human derelicts from negative
to positive. And because of the special power in this Written
Word they were inspired to clear the cobwebs from their
thinking. Thus they became clean in thought and habit. Many,
like St. Augustine, have been moved to deep repentance and, like
him, they have been motivated to devote their lives to the service
of God and mankind. And many great evangelists climbed from
these ranks.
Now, there are some good people of strong religious faith who
also read their Bibles but say to us, "Don't try to interfere with


God," when we recommend other inspirational books. Cobwebs
prevent them from trying to extract the good wherever it can be
found.


#
Now these good people fear
that it is sacrilegious to dare to explore the powers of the mind
God has given them to choose, to plan, and to control their
future. Many books of inspiration are written to motivate the
reader to direct his thoughts, control his emotions, and ordain his
destiny. And they often help the reader to comprehend the truths
of the Bible.
This is true, for example, in such a non-fiction best seller as The
Power of Positive Thinking. In his book Norman Vincent Peale
endeavors to motivate the reader to better himself. To do so, he
quotes directly from the Good Book in which such people do
believe. Some of the quotations Dr. Peale uses (and which it
would be wise to memorize) are
'



/

=



!

=
/

J

)

!

=
=



#

# '

=
#

!
/


!=

#

,

'

J
=


'

J'

'

You have just seen several mental cobwebs as we have pointed
them out to you. Some of these are
. Negative (a) feelings, (b) emotions, (c) passions, (d)
habits, (e) beliefs and (f) prejudices.
. Seeing only the mote in the other fellow's eye.
. Arguments and misunderstandings due to semantic
difficulties.
. False conclusions resulting from false premises.
. All-inclusive, restrictive words or expressions as basic or
minor premises.
. The idea that necessity forces dishonesty.
. Unclean thoughts and habits.
. Fear that it is sacrilegious to use the powers of your
mind.
And so you see there are many varieties of cobwebs-some small,
some large, some weak, some strong. Yet if you make an
additional listing of your own, and then examine the strands of
each cobweb closely, you will find that they are all spun by
NMA.
And when you think about it for a while, you will see that the
strongest cobweb spun by NMA is the cobweb of inertia. Inertia
causes you to do nothing; or, if you are moving in the wrong
direction, keeps you from resisting or stopping. You go on and
on.
= That which seems logical to
the person who is ignorant of the facts or know-how may be
illogical to the man who does know. When you make decisions


because you refuse to keep an open mind and learn the truth —
that is ignorance. And NMA keeps alive and grows fat on
ignorance. Eliminate it! Success Through a Positive Mental
Attitude indicates clearly how you can eliminate it.
The man with PMA may not know the facts or have the knowhow. He may not understand. Yet he recognizes the basic premise
that truth is truth and is not false regardless of his lack of
knowledge or understanding. He therefore endeavors to keep an
open mind and to learn. He must base his conclusions on what he
does know, yet be prepared to change them when he becomes
more enlightened.
Will you dare to clear the cobwebs from your thinking? If your
answer is "yes," then let Pilot No.  guide you as you move
forward into  Four. You will be ready to see with an open
mind. You will be ready to explore the powers of your mind. And
when you do — your exploration will lead you to a great
discovery. But only you can make it for yourself.
-. '. 

. You are what you think. Your thoughts are evaluated by
whether your attitude is positive or negative. Take a look at
yourself. Are you ) a good person?... ) evil?... ) healthy?...
) psychosomatically ill?... ) wealthy?... ) poor? If you are,
then ) you have good thoughts... ) your thoughts are evil... )
your thoughts are of good health... ) your thinking makes you
so... ) your thoughts are of riches... ) your thoughts are of
poverty.



. Negative feelings, emotions, passions — prejudices, beliefs,
habits you clear these mental cobwebs by turning your
talisman from NMA to PMA.
. You can clear the mental cobwebs of negative passions,
emotions, feelings, tendencies, prejudices, beliefs and habits
by flipping your invisible talisman from NMA to PMA. You
will learn how as you respond to what you read in Success
Through a Positive Mental Attitude.
. When you are faced with a problem that involves a
misunderstanding with other persons, you must first start with
yourself.
. One word can cause an argument, develop misunderstanding,
generate unhappiness and end in misery. One word with PMA,
when compared to the same word with NMA, brings opposite
effects. One word can bring peace or war, yes or no, love or
hate, integrity or dishonesty.
. Let's start with a meeting of the minds. When Dr. Fosdick
brought about a meeting of the minds, the young man himself
concluded that he was not an atheist, he did believe in God.
. Frog legs taught him logic. When you reason by inference, be
certain that your major and minor premises are correct.
. Such all-inclusive, restrictive words as always — only —
never — nothing — every — everyone — no one — can't —
impossible should be eliminated as premises in reasoning until
you are certain that they are correct.
. Necessity is the word. Does necessity motivate you to high
achievement through your personal honesty and integrity, or



does necessity motivate you to try to get results through
deception or dishonesty?
. A teen-age problem child you may know one. But don't give
up hope. He may not become a saint. But someday be may
make his world and your world a better world to live in.
. Direct your thoughts; control your emotions; and ordain your
destiny! Memorize and repeat frequently the self-motivators
quoted from the Bible on page .
. Learn to separate "facts" from fiction. Then learn the
difference between important facts and un-important facts.

DIRECT YOUR THOUGHTS WITH PMA
TO CONTROL YOUR EMOTIONS
AND TO ORDAIN YOUR DESTINY



CHAPTER 
Will You Dare to Explore the Powers of Your Mind?
"You are a mind with a body!"
Because you are a mind, you possess mystical powers — powers
known and unknown. Dare to explore the power of your mind!
Why explore them?
When you make the discoveries that are awaiting you, they can
bring you () physical, mental and moral health, happiness, and
wealth; () success in your chosen field of endeavor; and even ()
a means to affect, use, control, a harmonize with powers known
and unknown.
And dare to investigate all non-physical forces lying outside the
realm of known physical processes — forces which you can use
when you learn how to apply them. And this will not be so
difficult for you — no more difficult than turning on a television
set for the first time.
For a little child can tune into his favorite television program.
Now, when he does, he neither knows the construction of the
broadcasting station or his receiving set nor the technology
involved. But that's all right. For at the child needs to know is
how to turn the right knob or push the right button.
You will see in this chapter how you can turn the right knob or
push the right button to get what you want from the most
effective electrical machine ever conceived. Although this
particular machine is the sublime handiwork of Divine Power —
you own it. How is it made? Well, among other things, it is
comprised of over  trillion electrical cells. Naturally, it has



many component parts. And each part is in itself an electrical
mechanism.
And one part is an electrical marvel. Yet it weighs only fifty
ounces. Its mechanism consists of over  billion cells, which
generate, receive, record, and transmit energy.
What is this wonderful machine that you own? Your body. You
are and will be the same you even though you lose an arm, an
eye, or other parts of your body.
And the electrical marvel? Your brain and your nervous system.
It is the mechanism through which your body is controlled and
through which your mind functions.
And your mind it, too, has parts. One is known as the conscious,
and the other the subconscious. They synchronize. They work
together. Scientists have learned a great deal about the conscious
mind. Yet it has been less than a hundred years since we began to
explore the vast unknown territory of the subconscious — even
though primitive man has deliberately used the mystical powers
of the subconscious from the beginning of man's history, and
even today the Aborigines of Australia and other primitive
peoples do so to a very great extent.
Let's start exploring now!
)
*
;Let's
begin by accompanying Bill McCall of Sydney, Australia on a
journey from failure and defeat to success and achievement.
It was at the age of  that Bill started a business of his own —
hides and skins. He failed. At the age of , he ran for Federal
Congress. And again, he failed. Now it seems that instead of



crushing him, these and other defeats motivated this young
Australian to develop inspirational dissatisfaction.
So he began searching for rules of success.
You see, Bill McCall wanted to become rich, and he thought he
could find rules for acquiring wealth in inspirational books.
Therefore, while checking the inspirational book section of the
library, Bill became intrigued by the title Think and Grow Rich.
He borrowed the book and began to read. He read it once, and
then he read it again. And even though he read it the third time,
Bill McCall was unable to understand exactly how he could apply
the principles whereby some of the richest men in the world
acquired their wealth. He told us
"I was reading Think and Grow Rich for the fourth time while
walking leisurely along a business street in Sydney. And then it
happened! It happened suddenly. I stopped in front of a meat
market window and glanced up. And in that very fraction of a
second I had a flash of inspiration." He smiled as he continued
"I exclaimed aloud, 'That's it! I've got it!' I was startled at my
emotional outburst. So was a lady who was passing by. She
stopped and looked at me in amazement. I hurried home with my
new discovery." He continued seriously
"You see, I was reading  Four entitled Auto-suggestion.
The subheading was The Medium for Influencing the
Subconscious Mind.
"Now I remember that when I was a boy my father read aloud
from Emile Coué's little book Self-Mastery Through Conscious
Autosuggestion" He then looked al Napoleon Hill and said



"It was you who pointed out in your book that if Emile Coué was
successful in helping individuals avoid sickness and in bringing
the sick back to good health, through conscious autosuggestion,
autosuggestion could also be used to acquire riches or anything
else one might desire 'Get rich through autosuggestion' that was
my great discovery. It was a new concept to me." McCall then
described the principles. It almost seemed as if he had memorized
them from the book itself.
"You know conscious autosuggestion is the agency of control
through which an individual may voluntarily feed his
subconscious mind on thoughts of a creative nature, or, by
neglect, permit thoughts of a destructive nature to find their way
into the rich garden of his mind
"When you read aloud twice daily the written statement of your
desire for money with emotion and concentrated attention, and
you see and feel yourself already in possession of the money, you
communicate the object of your desire directly to your
subconscious mind. Through repetition of this procedure, you
voluntarily create thought habits, which are favorable to your
efforts to transmute desire into its monetary equivalent.
"Let me say again It is most important that when you read aloud
the statement of your desire through which you are endeavoring
to develop a money consciousness, you read with emotion and
strong feeling.
"Your ability to use the principles of autosuggestion will depend
very largely upon your capacity to concentrate upon a given
desire until that desire becomes a burning desire.
"When I arrived home, out of breath for running, I immediately
sat down at the dining room table and wrote 'My definite major
aim is to be a millionaire by I.'" Still looking at Napoleon


Hill, be continued, "You mentioned that a person should be
specific as to the amount of money he wants and set a date. I
did."
Now, the man to whom we were talking was not the young Bill
McCall who failed at the age of . He became known as the
Honorable William V. McCall, the youngest man ever to become
a member of the Australian Parliament; as the former chairman of
the board of directors of the Coca-Cola subsidiary in Sydney; and
as the director of  family-owned corporations. And as to riches
— he became a millionaire, and quite as rich as some of the men
he had read about in the book from which he got the inspiration
to explore the power of his subconscious mind with selfsuggestion, (Incidentally, he became a millionaire four years
ahead of schedule!)
)

;You
will note we use the word "self-suggestion" as being synonymous
with the term "conscious autosuggestion" used by Emile Coué.
McCall remembered that when he was a boy his father bad
benefited from a great discovery found in a book of his day — a
discovery that every man, woman and child can effectively
employ when he finds it for himself. Like Bill McCall and his
father, you too can properly employ the power of conscious
autosuggestion.
Now conscious autosuggestion was revealed to Emile Coué
because he dared to explore the powers of his own mind and the
minds of others. Before he made his great discovery, he used
hypnosis to cure the physical illnesses of his patients. But after
making his great discovery, which was in reality based on a
simple natural law, he abandoned the use of hypnosis.
And how did he find and recognize this natural law?


Emile Coué's great discovery was made when he found the
answer to some questions he asked himself. They were
)

* +,/


!



,
, K

#
#

!
!

# !
-

B

=
=

)

* .,/

!
#



!
!

!

,

#
,

The answer to his second question came quickly Anyone, even a
child, can be taught to develop a positive mental attitude. The
method is to repeat positive affirmations such as Day by day, in
every way, through the grace of God, I am getting better and
better.
Throughout Success Through a Positive Mental Attitude you will
see many self-motivators which you can I use for your own selfsuggestion. And if by now you don't know how to use selfsuggestion, you will be you complete this book.
*
There are over ,
children born out of wedlock in the United States each year,
and over a million and a half teenagers enter penal institutions for
car thefts and other crimes. These personal tragedies could
in many instances be avoided if (a) the parents learned how to
employ suggestion properly, and (b) if their sons and daughters


were taught how effectively to use spiritual self-suggestion.
Through the proper use of suggestion, these young people could
be motivated to develop inviolable moral standards through
their own conscious autosuggestion. And they would know how
to neutralize or repel the undesirable suggestions of their
associates in an intelligent manner.
Of course, every individual responds to (unconscious) autosuggestion throughout his life more often than he does to
conscious autosuggestion. In such instances he responds to habit
and the inner urge of the subconscious. When a man with PMA is
faced with a serious personal problem, self-motivators flash from
the subconscious to the conscious to aid him. This is especially
true in times of emergency — especially when death's door is
about to be opened. Such was the case with Ralph Weppner of
Too-woomba, Queensland, Australia, one of our PMA Science of
Success course students.
It was  in the morning. In a small hospital bedroom two
nursing sisters were keeping vigil beside Ralph's body. At 
the afternoon before an emergency call had been made to his
family to rush to the hospital. When they arrived at his bedside,
Ralph was in a state of coma as the result of a severe heart attack.
The family was now out in the corridor, each one worrying or
praying in his own special way.
In the dimly lit bedroom two nursing sisters worked anxiously —
one on each wrist — trying to feel a pulse beat. Because Ralph
had not come out of the coma during this entire six hour period
and the doctor had done all that he felt he could, the doctor had
left the room. He had gone to visit one of his other hospital
patients who was also in a critical condition.



Ralph couldn't move, talk, or feel anything. Yet he could hear the
voices of the sisters. He could think quite clearly during portions
of this period. He heard one sister excitedly state
"He's not breathing! Can you pick up a beat?''
The answer was, "No."
Again and again he heard the question and answer "Can you now
pick up a beat?" "No."
"I'm all right," he thought, "but I must tell them. Somehow I must
tell them."
At the same time he was amused at the sisters for being fooled
like that. He kept thinking, "I'm quite all right. I'm not going to
die. But how — how — can I tell them?"
And then he remembered the self-motivator he had learned You
can do it if you believe you can!
He tried to open his eyes, but it seemed the more he tried, the
more he failed. His eyelids wouldn't respond to the command of
his will. He tried to move his arm, his leg, his head — but he
couldn't feel any reaction at all. In fact, he didn't feel a thing.
Again and again he tried to open his eyes, until at last he heard
the words "I saw one eyelid flicker — he's still there."
"I felt no fear," Ralph says, "and still thought how amusing it
was. Periodically one sister called to me, 'Are you there, Mr.
Weppner? Are you there?' To which I would try to respond by
moving my eyelid to tell them that I was all right — I was still
there."
This went on for a considerable time until through constant effort
Ralph was at last able to open one, then both, eyes. It was then



that his doctor returned. With wonderful skill and persistence the
doctor and nurses brought him back to life.
&
But it was the autosuggestion You can do it
if you believe you can — that he had memorized from the PMA
Science of Success course — that helped to rescue him when he
was at death's door.
Now the books we read and the thoughts we think affect our
subconscious minds. But there are also unseen forces that
likewise have powerful effects even though they are subliminal
— below the realm of consciousness.
These unseen forces can be from known physical causes or from
unknown sources. Before discussing the unknown, let's illustrate
with an example that is now common knowledge since the
publishing of Hidden Persuaders by Vance Packard. The story
first appeared in American newspapers and later was picked up in
magazines. Let's consider a report that appeared in a leading
national magazine on the subject of subliminal advertising. The
report tells of an experiment conducted in a New Jersey movie
theater, in which advertising messages were flashed on the screen
so fast that the viewers were not consciously aware of them.
During a period of six weeks, more than forty thousand persons
unknowingly became subjects of this test, while attending the
theater. Flashed on the screen by a special process that made
them invisible to the naked eye were two advertising messages
concerning products that were available in the theater lobby. At
the end of the six weeks, results were tabulated sales of one of
the products had soared over  per cent, while sales of the other
product rose almost  per cent.
The inventor of the process explained that, although the messages
were invisible, they still had taken effect on many in the audience


because of the ability of the subconscious mind to absorb
impressions that are too fleeting to be registered consciously.
When this story appeared in the press, the public was horrified
"by this attempt to channel our thinking habits, our purchasing
decisions, and our thought processes" by the use of subliminal
suggestion. People were afraid. They feared brainwashing in its
most subtle form. Yet it is amazing to us that someone didn't take
the PMA approach. Subliminal suggestion can be employed for
desirable objectives, too. Everyone knows that power can be used
for evil or for good, depending upon how it is directed.
Now that the experiment has proved its purpose, it doesn't take
much imagination to see what the beneficial results to the viewers
would be should the following self-motivators be flashed on a
movie screen
#
&




# 




"


!

!

!

!


#

#

.% 
!

-





This would be a PMA approach, provided, of course, the consent
of the audience was obtained in advance.



Another illustration of a known physical force affecting the
subconscious mind can be shown by the effect of radar on
navigators.
)

+When
the Andrea Doria, captained by Pierre Clamai, and the
Stockholm, under Captain H. G. Nordenson, collided
approximately  miles off Nantucket Island,  persons died.
The Andrea Doria was sighted by the radar operator of the
Stockholm when they were  miles apart.
The Grace Line luxury liner, the Santa Rosa under Captain Frank
S. Siwik, collided with the tanker Valchem on March , ,
 miles off the New Jersey coast Four crewmen were killed.
Second Mate Walter Wells, the radar operator on the Santa Rosa,
claimed he had made two plottings of the tanker Valchem's
course.
No satisfactory explanation of the true cause of these collisions
has resulted from the investigations in either of these instances.
Could the waves from the radar instruments have been the real
cause? Perhaps Sidney A. Schneider has the answer.
As a young teen-ager, Sidney A. Schneider of Skokie, Illinois,
became interested in hypnotism when he observed his older
brother, a university student, successfully place his first subject
under hypnosis. Sidney became an expert hypnotist. During his
business career he became a radio operator and an engineer in
electronics.
In the Second World War Sidney Schneider was a vital part of the
system known as "I. F. F." — Information, Friend or Foe. His job
was to see to it that every ship leaving our country was equipped
with radar. He noticed that radar operators sometimes went into a


trance. They weren't aware that they had been in a trance when
they came out of it.
Because of his knowledge of hypnosis and electronics, Schneider
concluded that the fixed attention of the naval employees took
place when the waves from the radar machine were synchronized
with the brain waves of the operator. On this theory he changed
the waves on the radar instrument and eliminated the recurrence
of the trances.
Sidney Schneider told us that he converted his conclusions
regarding the principle that placed the seamen operating radar in
a trance into the Brain Wave Synchronizer, a machine which he
invented after the war.
What is the Brain Wave Synchronizer?
It is an electronic instrument designed to induce various levels of
hypnosis by subliminal and photic (light) stimulation of the brain
waves. The instrument can be used alone or combined with a tape
recording of the therapist's verbal suggestions. No physical
connections or attachments are placed on the patient. Results are
obtained at any distance in which the light in the machine is
visible. The apparatus induces light to deep hypnotic levels in
over  per cent of the subjects in an average time of three
minutes.
In an experiment with the Brain Wave Synchronizer, none of the
persons involved was informed about the machine or what it
could do. Neither were they told that they were subjects of an
experiment. Yet  per cent of them were hypnotized to various
degrees, ranging from light to deep states.
"Why and how does the Brain Wave Synchronizer work?" we
asked.


"It is like a television transmitter," Schneider said. "The human
brain produces pulses (waves) of electricity in several frequency
ranges. This knowledge has been applied in the field of medicine
since  and the invention of the electroencephalograph
commonly known as the EEG machine, an apparatus for
recording brain waves.
"My machine operates much like a television system," Schneider
continued. "The reason the picture on your receiving set does not
drift up or down is that the pulses generated within the set
synchronize with corresponding pulses generated by the
transmitting television station. The receiver is forced to operate at
a rate controlled by the transmitter and the picture must obey.
"Like the transmitter of a television station, the Brain Wave
Synchronizer also produces synchronizing pulses. And through
photic stimulation, the waves sent from the synchronizer cause
the frequency of the brain waves also to lock in step. At this point
hypnosis can be achieved. Just compare your brain to a receiving
set, and the Brain Wave Synchronizer to a television transmitter."
And you will see as you continue to read that in addition to
comparing your brain to a receiving set, you can compare it to a
television transmitter also.
+
We have just
explored some of the unseen forces from known physical causes.
Now let's proceed further into the realm of the unknown the
thrilling field of psychic phenomena, such as
*=

.B

CL #
!

"

D
BC )

L


=

A= .

BC 

L

BC .

L

BC.

L

'

#

L

?

!

? =

Now let's be realistic and keep our feet firmly on the ground.
Let's explore the unknown with common sense! You'll be in
danger unless you use good logic and avoid the gathering of
cobwebs in your thinking. Facts should be your stepping stones
over the river of doubt. Therefore, let an experienced guide direct
you along safe paths. And we will introduce you to such a guide.
But before we do, let's talk about the past.
Thomas J. Hudson's famous book, The Law of Psychic
Phenomena, when published in , became a best seller. (The
book is published today in paperback by the Hudson-Cohen
Publishing Company, Monterey, California.) It contained many
thrilling stories of reported psychic experiences. The
imaginations of tens of thousands of people who read this book
were stimulated. Some were ready. Some were not.
From then on public interest in psychic phenomena made rapid
progress. But many persons, not properly prepared, injured
themselves by becoming crackpots. This was due to the
awesomeness and magnetic interest a little knowledge of psychic
powers generated within them. There is a noticeable tendency of
some persons who are not properly educated and mature in their
thinking and not very well adjusted emotionally to become
fascinated with this intriguing study. It is easy to understand why
so many religious leaders, scientists, and persons responsible for



the welfare of the people found the study of psychic phenomena
an anathema
*=

/!

!
=

A= 

!

E= "

!

=

!



'

' !
!

;= 

#
!

=
#

#

=
Anything associated with psychic phenomena became repellent.
It was taboo.
In spite of the dangers, taboos, and social or professional
ostracism, there were courageous, honorable men with good
common sense who had the courage to explore for the truth.
But it remained for the long, courageous fight of Dr. Joseph
Banks Rhine, formerly of Duke University, inspired and assisted
by his wife Dr. Louisa E. Rhine, to clothe the study of psychic
phenomena with respectability. This is due to the impeccable
character of Dr. Rhine and to his  years of controlled
laboratory experiments based on mathematical laws. His task was
a difficult one because spontaneous psychic phenomena are not
apt to occur in a laboratory. Such phenomena occur when least
expected, and most often when a person is under the greatest
emotional strain, or possessed of an intensified obsessional desire
— often simultaneously with the death of a loved one.
$
It is apparent
that any writer on the subject of psychic phenomena today


endeavors to have the protection of a part of the cloak of Dr.
Rhine's respectability by referring to Dr. Rhine and Duke
University to make his own theories digestible. We are no
exception. We urgently suggest that if you are interested further,
you read The Reach of the Mind and the other books of which Dr.
Rhine is the author or co-author. Our recommendation Let Dr.
Joseph Banks Rhine be your guide.
And how successful has Dr Rhine's work been in breaking down
the resistance to investigation and belief in these strange
mindpowers? A fair test, it would seem to us, lies in the fact that
hard-headed businessmen are convinced and are making
experiments of their own In an interview, Dr. Peter A.
Castruccio, Director of the Westinghouse Astronautics Institute,
confirmed that Westinghouse scientists are engaged in research to
find a means of using telepathy and clairvoyance for long
distance communication. Dr. Castruccio too had many lengthy
visits with Dr. Rhine before a decision was reached to engage in
this great experiment.
And will the search for ways and means to harness telepathy and
clairvoyance and make them commercially feasible be
successful? Let us answer this as follows Not too long ago
people were scoffing at ideas that were unbelievable to them then
but are taken for granted today (a) matter being turned into
energy and energy into matter; (b) the breaking of the atom; (c)
man-made satellites; (d) jet power; or (e) everyday necessities
like television, for example.
And what about the electronic computer that was designed from
the human computer the human brain and the nervous system.
Every one was conceived, believed and achieved by men with
PMA! Machines that operate with the speed of light — ,
miles per second! Machines that can calculate , arithmetical
operations per second and detect and correct their own errors!


Machines that became a reality because man built into them
electrical circuits which in many respects function like the known
electrical activity of the nervous system of your own physical
body. Our answer
What the mind of man can conceive and believe, the mind of man
can achieve with PMA!
But no machine or manmade invention is as marvelous as the
wonderful human computer you own your brain and your
nervous system, with their power of electrical activity.
Man is more than a body with a brain.
You are a mind with a body — a mind, possessing, and also
affected by, powers known and unknown! A mind composed of
two parts the conscious and the subconscious.
Here we have stressed most the concept of the subconscious mind
— its powers and the forces known and unknown that affect it.
But what about the conscious mind? That is equally important.
And you will read about it in the next chapter entitled… And
Something More!
Now, if your reaction to what you have read has not given you an
insight on how you can turn the right knob or push the right
button to get what you want from the machine you own, dare to
explore the powers of your mind. Be guided by Pilot No … And
Something More!
PILOT NO. 
Thoughts to Steer By



. You are a mind with a body. Your body is an electrical
machine. Your brain is a mechanism that is an electrical
marvel.
. Your mind has two parts the conscious and the subconscious.
They work together.
. Conscious autosuggestion and self-suggestion are synonymous, and are contrasted with the word autosuggestion, an unconscious activity. Autosuggestion automatically sends
messages from the subconscious to the conscious mind as well
as to parts of the body. The subconscious mind is the seat
of habit, memory, inviolable standards of conduct, etc.
. Day by day in every respect I am getting better and better.
Self-affirmations repeated with frequency, rapidity, and
emotion affect the subconscious mind and cause it to react.
Bill Mc-Call acquired wealth through the use of selfsuggestion.
. Coué's great discovery was you can use healthful, positive
suggestions to help yourself. And you can also refrain from
negative, harmful suggestions.
. Learn to use the proper suggestion in influencing others. Learn
to employ the right conscious autosuggestions. When you do,
you can have physical, mental and moral health, happiness
and success.
. You can do it if you have PMA and believe you can.
. Hidden persuaders Take the PMA approach.
. Your brain sends out energy in the form of brain waves. And
this energy is power which can affect another person or an
object.


. A little knowledge may be a dangerous thing. Dare to explore
the powers of your mind. When you enter the dangerous,
unexplored territory of psychic phenomena, let Dr. Joseph
Banks Rhine be your guide.
DAY BY DAY IN EVERY WAY
THROUGH THE GRACE OF GOD
I AM
GETTING BETTER AND BETTER
THROUGH PMA



CHAPTER 
... And Something More
Have you sincerely tried — and still failed?
Perhaps you failed because there was something more that was
needed to bring you the success you were seeking. Euclid's axiom
says "The whole is equal to the sum of all the parts and is greater
than any of its parts." This can be related, assimilated, and
applied to every result or achievement. Conversely, any part is
smaller than the whole. Therefore, it's important that you add all
the necessary parts to complete the whole.
A negative mental attitude is one of the primary causes failure.
You may be needlessly ignorant of facts, universal laws, and
powers. You may know many of them but fail to apply them to a
specific need. You may not know how you can affect, use,
control, or harmonize with powers known and unknown.
When you seek success with PMA, you keep trying. You keep
searching to find something more. Failure is experienced by those
who, when they experience defeat, stop trying to find the
something more.
*

<
+
,
;Give a puzzle to a child, and he may not solve it.
If he keeps trying and learns how to solve it, he can then work it
quickly. You aren't a child.
But perhaps there are several of life's puzzles you would like to
solve. You can solve them more easily with PMA. For example,
there once was a song writer who wrote a song but couldn't get it
published. George M. Cohan bought it and added something



more. The something more made George M. Cohan a fortune. He
merely added three little words Hip, Hip, Hooray!
Thomas Edison tried more than ten thousand experiments before
he developed a successful incandescent lamp. But after each
defeat he kept searching for something more until he found what
he was looking for. When the unknown became known to him,
innumerable electric light bulbs could be manufactured. It was
necessary only to apply the universal laws that had always existed
but which had not been previously recognized as applicable for
the specific invention.
There are many cures and preventatives for diseases. But at a
given time they may be unknown. The medical preventative for
polio was unknown until Dr. Jonas Edward Salk used principles
of universal law that were previously not applied by the medical
profession for the prevention of this dreaded disease.
You may make a million dollars by employing a success formula.
If you lose your money, you can make another million — and
even more! That is, provided you know the formula and apply it.
Suppose you didn't recognize the formula that helped you make
your first million. You may fail in your second attempt because
you deviate from the principles of success that are applicable. On
your second attempt, you may need to make adjustments for
changing conditions. But the principles will remain the same.
.
;Many inventors came exceedingly close
to inventing the airplane before the Wright brothers. The Wright
brothers used the same principles that were employed by the
others. But they added — something more. They created a new
combination. So they succeeded where all others failed. The
something more was rather simple. They attached movable flaps
of a particular design to the edges of the wings so the pilot could


control them and maintain the plane's equilibrium. These flaps
were the forerunners of the modern aileron.
You'll notice there's a common denominator to all these success
stories. In each case, the secret ingredient was the application of a
previously unapplied universal law. That made the difference. So,
if you are standing on the threshold of success without being able
to pass over, try adding something more. It needn't be much. The
words "Hip, were all it took to make a hit tune. Tiny flaps were
all it took to make an airplane failed. It isn't necessarily the
quantity of something more, but the "inspired quality" that
counts.


<
#
 Many persons claimed to have
invented the telephone before Alexander Graham Bell. Among
those who held prior patents were Gray, Edison, Dolbear,
McDonough, Vanderweyde, and Reis. Philipp Reis was the only
one who apparently came close to success. The little difference
that made the big difference was a single screw. Reis didn't know
that it he had turned one screw one quarter of a turn, he would
have transformed interrupted current into continuous current.
Then he would have been successful!
In a United States Supreme Court case, the court noted
)

@

' ##

!


D


!



#

!

!

#

!
!

#


!

#

=

The Court further noted


@

#
!

!




="
'=  !
=

As in the case of the Wright brothers, the something more Bell
added was comparatively simple. He switched from an
intermittent to a continuous current, the only type capable of
reproducing human speech. The two currents are exactly the same
direct current. "Intermittent" means breaking with a slight pause.
Specifically, Bell kept the circuit open instead of breaking the
circuit intermittently as Reis had done. The Court concluded
@




= 
!

!
= 
#
@
 = )

!

#
@


#

# 
?
'


#
= / @

#


'

#
= )
#

!
=

# '

=
&
R. G.
LeTourneau, builder of heavy earth-moving equipment,
motivated thousands of persons with his inspirational speeches.
In these talks, he referred reverently to "my Senior Partner." He
told about the inspiration and help he received from the "Partner."
LeTourneau had little formal education. But he performed feats
of engineering that are astounding.
As a sub-contractor on the great Hoover Dam in Nevada,
LeTourneau lost a fortune because he ran into an unexpected
strata of rock. The cost of drilling through the rock was more than


he had calculated in estimating his contract. So he went broke
trying to fulfill his end of the bargain.
But instead of brooding over his loss, LeTourneau turned to
prayer. How did he pray? By expressing gratitude — profound
gratitude — for what he had left A sound body. A strong pair of
hands. A brain that could think. And something more. "In my
hour of greatest distress," said LeTourneau, "I found my greatest
asset in the revelation and discovery of a silent Senior Partner. I
have since recognized this Partner in my personal and business
life. Everything I have — everything I have done that has been
worthwhile — I owe to Him."
Napoleon Hill was associated with Mr. LeTourneau for eighteen
months and had an opportunity to observe him closely. By this
time LeTourneau had become a well-known inspirational
lecturer. He devoted much of his time to traveling around the
country in his private plane, preaching his message "It's
wonderful to be in partnership with God." One night when the
two men were flying home from a speaking engagement in North
Carolina, something interesting happened.
Soon after his pilot took off, Mr. LeTourneau went to sleep. In
about thirty minutes Napoleon Hill saw him take in it. After the
plane landed, Napoleon Hill asked Mr. LeTourneau if he
remembered writing in his notebook.
"Why no!" exclaimed LeTourneau. He immediately pulled the
notebook from his pocket and looked at it. He said "Here it is!
I've been looking for this for several months! Here's the answer to
a problem that has kept me from completing a machine we are
working on!"
When you receive a flash of inspiration, write it down! This may
be the something more that you are looking for. We believe that


communication with Infinite Intelligence is through the
subconscious mind. We believe you should establish the habit of
immediately writing down flashes of inspiration as they are
communicated to you from the subconscious to the conscious.
Albert Einstein developed intricate and profound theories
regarding the universe and the natural laws that control it. Yet he
used only the simplest — but most important — of instruments
ever invented a pencil and a piece of paper. He wrote down his
questions and answers. You Will develop your mental powers
when you learn and develop the habit of asking yourself
questions — when you learn and develop the habit of using
pencil and paper to write down your questions, ideas, and
answers.
It is unlikely that Einstein and other scientists would have come
to their successful conclusions unless they had learned from the
recorded knowledge of mathematicians and scientists who
preceded them. It is also unlikely that Einstein would have tried
unless he had been motivated to search for universal principles
after having developed the habit of engaging in thinking time and
action. Do you know of any great thinker, or person of
achievement, who does not make notes of ideas that occur to
him?
+
+ ; Your
Creative Power and Applied Imagination by Alex F. Osborn, of
the advertising firm of Batten, Barton, Durstine and Osborn, have
inspired hundreds of thousands of persons to engage in creative
thinking. What is equally important, these people have been
motivated to positive, constructive action. Thinking is not
creative unless it is followed through with action.
Osborn, like so many creative thinkers, used a notepad and a
pencil as favorite working tools. When an idea occurred, he jotted


it down. He, like other great men of accomplishment, engaged in
thinking, planning, and study time.
Alex Osborn stated an obvious truth when he said "Everyone has
some creative ability, but most people haven't learned to use it."
Osbon's brainstorming methods, explained in his easily-read
textbook Applied Imagination, are being employed in college
classrooms, factories, business offices, churches, clubs, and in the
home. Brainstorming, as developed by Osborn, is a very simple
method whereby two or more persons use their collective
imaginations to come up with ideas that flash from their
subconscious to their conscious minds in answer to a question
incorporating a specific problem. The ideas are written down just
as fast as they strike the minds of the participants. No critical
judgment is permitted until after many ideas are written down.
Later the ideas are screened and judged to determine their practicality and value.
La Salle College in Philadelphia, and many universities
throughout the country, teach well-rounded courses in creative
thinking which include the methods used by creative thinkers in
many phases of business and industry.
It was just such creative thinking that enabled Dr. Elmer Gates to
make this world a better place in which to live. Dr. Gates was a
great American teacher, philosopher, psychologist, scientist, and
inventor. During his lifetime, he developed hundreds of
inventions and discoveries in the various arts and sciences.
He did his creative thinking by "sitting for ideas." Dr. Gates' own
life proved that his methods of brain and body building could
develop a healthy body and increase the efficiency of the mind.
Napoleon Hill recalls how, armed with a letter of introduction
from Andrew Carnegie, he went to visit Dr. Gates at his Chevy


Chase laboratory. When Napoleon Hill arrived, Dr. Gates'
secretary told him "I'm sorry, but… I'm not permitted to disturb
Dr. Gates at this time."
"How long do you think it will be before I can see him?"
Napoleon Hill asked.
"I don't know, but it might take as long as three hours,"
"Do you mind telling me why you are unable to disturb him?"
She hesitated and then responded, "He is sitting for ideas?"
Napoleon Hill smiled. "What does that mean — sitting for
ideas?"
She returned the smile and said, "Maybe we'd better let Dr. Gates
explain. I really don't know how long it will take, but you're
welcome to wait. If you prefer to come again, I'll see if I can
make a definite appointment for you."
Mr. Hill decided to wait. It was a valuable decision. What he
learned was well worth waiting for. This is how Napoleon Hill
tells what happened
&=

!
/ ?'

!
! #

=
!

#




#

/

#/

,
"

!

! 
!



!= )

= 

#





(
/

=
# &=

#
! #

#


!

#

# 


= "
 '

!
!#
!
!!
#

'

!
!
=
!
=
#
! =
#

#
!
!
!

#
!

=



#

#

&=

!

=
!

#
#

?
!
#

!

=" #
!
!

="

# '



!
#

!

#
'

!

#


' =" #
#
#
!=

!=

When Napoleon Hill asked Dr. Gates to explain the source of his
results while sitting for ideas, he gave the following explanation
"The sources of all ideas are
*= F

#

!



A= F
#

#
!

!
!!

=
! !

=




E= )

/
' #

/


#
#
!
! =

"When I sit for ideas, I may tune in to one or all of these sources.
If other sources of ideas are available, I do not know what they
are."
Dr. Elmer Gates found the time to concentrate and think in his
search for something more. He knew specifically what he was
looking for. And he followed through with positive action!
In  Seven, we will discuss how you can "Learn To See"
so that your search for something more will be made easier. In
your search, you may fail. But in failing you may succeed in
discovering something even greater. Ask yourself, "Why?" Be
observant. Think! Get into action!
The Bible and both a good, comprehensive dictionary and an
encyclopedia should, we believe, be in every home. They also
can help in your search for something more.
YOU DON'T NEED TO BE ASHAMED
TO BE A FAILURE
LIKE CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS!
Look in your Encyclopaedia Britannica and you'll find the
thrilling, exciting story of Christopher Columbus. He studied
astronomy, geometry, and cosmography at the University of
Pavia. The Book of Marco Polo, theories of geographers, reports
and traditions of mariners, as well as floating works of art and
craftsmanship of non-European origin cast up by the sea — all
these stimulated his imagination.



Step by step over the years he came to the firm belief, through
inductive reasoning, that the world was a sphere. Having reached
this conclusion, he was convinced through deductive reasoning,
that the Asiatic continent could be reached by sailing westward
from Spain just as well as Marco Polo had reached it by traveling
east. He developed a burning desire to prove his theory. He
sought the necessary financial backing, ships, and men to explore
the unknown and find something more.
He got into action! He kept his mind on his objective. Over a
period of ten years he was often on the verge of receiving the
necessary help. But the deception of a king… the ridicule,
suspicion, and fear of subordinate government officials… the
disbelief of those who wanted to help him but who at the last
moment refused because of the skepticism of their scientific
advisors… all brought defeat after defeat. He kept trying.
In  he received the help for which he had so persistently
searched and prayed! In August of that year he sailed westward
for India, China, and Japan. He was on the right course and
headed in the right direction.
You know the story. After he landed on the islands in the
Caribbean, he returned to Spain with gold, cotton, Parrots,
curious arms, mysterious plants, unknown birds and beasts, and
several natives. He thought he had achieved his objective and had
reached the islands off India. He had failed. He had not reached
Asia. But, without being aware of it immediately, Columbus had
found something more! Quite a bit more!
You, like Christopher Columbus, may fail to reach your major
objectives, or your magnificent obsessions. , like him, may fail in
your efforts to reach a destination in the realm of the unknown.
But you may discover something more — something equaling the
wealth of the Americas. You, like him, may inspire and direct


those who follow you to head in the right direction, on the right
course, and to continue further into the unknown until they
achieve the worthwhile objectives you conceived. You, like
Columbus, have the time and the power to think. You, like him,
can persistently strive with a positive mental attitude to achieve
your definite major aims to find something more.
You don't need to be ashamed to be a failure like Christopher
Columbus.
;&
By now you
should be in a position to extract principles from specific
illustrations so that you can relate, assimilate, and use them. We
agree with Admiral H. G. Rickover in the fundamental truths of
his statement
!

#

# #

#

#
!

J

!

L!
#
#

=/

/

!

!
L

Learn the principles. Apply them. If you're not making
satisfactory progress toward achieving your aims, look for the
something more! It may be known or unknown. But you'll find it,
if you take the necessary time to study, think, plan, and search for
it.
Now this chapter would not be complete without reference to
Cosmic Habit Force. Use cosmic habit force is one of the 
success principles.



And the concept of cosmic habit force is easy to understand. For
it is a name that we have given to applied power of any natural,
or universal, principle or law, known or unknown.
Cosmic habit force can be simply defined as the use of universal
law, whether it is known or unknown to you.
As an example, it's easy to understand that when an object falls to
the ground, the law of gravity is being applied. And, therefore, if
you want an object to fall from a given height, you use cosmic
habit force. And in this particular instance — the law of gravity.
But the law of gravity, or any other law, is not in itself a power.
Yet when you properly use the principle, then power is employed
according to universal law.
And thus the breaking of the atom, every invention, every
chemical formula, every psychic phenomenon, every individual
action and reaction — be it physical, mental, or spiritual — is the
result of the use of natural law. For every result there is a cause.
And the result is brought about through the use of cosmic habit
force.
Again, man is a mind with a body. And he can think. It is through
thinking that he learns how to use cosmic habit force. And his
thinking can bring the thoughts he thinks into reality.
This concept is not difficult to comprehend, for in  Albert
Einstein gave to the world his now famous formula E = mc².
This formula explains the relationship between energy and
matter. When matter approaches the speed of light, we call it
energy, and as the velocity slows down to zero, it remains matter.
In the formula E is energy, m is mass or matter, and c represents
the velocity of light.



And thus we see that Einstein's formula is a word symbol of one
of the laws of cosmic habit force. And by understanding and
applying this formula man has been able to turn matter into
energy and energy into matter, and to use atomic power for
constructive purposes such as to light an entire city, to power
ships, or even for such everyday affairs as to develop heat for
cooking.
… And something more — we can now see that because matter
and energy are the same thing, everything in the universe is
related.
Now "You've Got a Problem? That's Good! And you'll learn in
the next chapter how to adapt many of the lessons learned in this
chapter to your own life. And then you will be able successfully
to meet the problems created by the universal law of change,
which — like all natural law — is the result of cosmic habit
force.
-. '. =

. … And something more. What does the important principle
contained in this chapter mean to you and how can you apply
it?
. If you have failed in an endeavor, could it be because you lack
something more — a missing number for a correct, winning
combination for success?
. The whole is equal to the sum of all the parts and is greater
than any of its parts. Are any missing parts keeping you from
success?



. The little difference between success and failure is often
something more Hip, Hip, Hooray! A movable wing flap. A
quarter-turn of a screw.
. Are you in partnership with your silent Senior Partner?
. Use the simplest, but most important, of instruments ever
invented — paper and pencil — to write down flashes of
inspiration when they occur.
. How does the technique of brainstorming differ from that of
"sitting for ideas"? What is the value of each?
. Use the success principle of Controlled Attention.
. Don't be afraid to be a failure like Christopher Columbus.
. Have you established the habit of learning fundamental
principles, or do you merely absorb quantities of facts?
. Do you understand and can you apply in your own experience
the fundamental truths and principles of Admiral H. G.
Rickover's statement?
Among the young engineers we interview we find few who have
received thorough training in engineering fundamentals or
principles; but most have absorbed quantities of facts… much
easier to learn than principles but of little use without application
of principles. Once a principle has been acquired it becomes a
part of one and is never lost. It can be applied to novel problems
and does not become obsolete as do all facts in a changing
society…
YOU DON'T NEED TO BE ASHAMED
TO BE A FAILURE
LIKE
CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS



(
+
CHAPTER 
You've Got a Problem? That's Good!
So you've got a problem? That's good! Why? Because repeated
victories over your problems are the rungs on your ladder of
success. With each victory you grow in wisdom, stature, and
experience. You become a better, bigger, more successful person
each time you meet a problem and tackle and conquer it with
PMA.
Stop and think about it for a moment. Do you know of a single
instance where any real achievement was made in your life, or in
the life of any person in history, that was not due to a problem
with which the individual was faced?
Everyone has problems. This is because you and everything in
the universe are in a constant process of change. Change is an
inexorable natural law. What is important to you is that your
success or failure to meet the challenges of change are dependent
upon your mental attitude.
You can direct your thoughts and control your emotions, and thus
regulate your attitude. You can choose whether your attitude will
be positive or negative. You can decide whether you will affect,
use, control, or harmonize with the changes in yourself and your
environment. You can ordain your destiny. When you meet the
challenges of change with PMA, you can intelligently solve each
problem with which you are confronted.



&
(  If you know and
believe the first principal element of a positive mental attitude
God is always a good God — then you can effectively use the
following formula and meet your problems
#

!

#
*=

'

!

&

=


D

'

=
A=

'
!
!= @ ! !
#
.% =

E=

!=



;=
M=

=
D )

'

BC
B C" #

!




D

,
/
J

#

/

,
>= F

#
#

%

Now the problems that will confront you will, broadly speaking,
be of three kinds personal problems — emotional, financial,
mental, moral, physical; family problems; and business or
professional problems. Because personal problems are the most
immediate problems experienced by all of us, we would like to
tell you the story of a man who met some of the most severe
problems a human being can experience. As you read this story,



see how he applied PMA to the solution of each difficulty until
he achieved ultimate victory.
&

(
,
This man was born in poverty. While in grade
school, he sold newspapers and sinned shoes in and around the
saloons on Seattle's waterfront to help his mother meet expenses.
Later he became a cabin boy on an Alaskan freighter during the
summer months. After be finished high school at the age of
seventeen, he left home. He became one of the horde of hobos
that rode the rails and traveled to every part of the United States.
His companions were hard-bitten men. He gambled, associated
with riffraff — men of the so-called "Border Legion." Soldiers of
fortune, fugitives, smugglers, cattle thieves, and the like were his
companions. He joined the forces of Pancho Villa in Mexico.
"You can't skate close to those extra-legal operations without
knowing about them, even if you have nothing to do with them,"
Charlie Ward said. "My mistake was being with the wrong companions. My major sin was associating with people who were
bad."
From time to time he won large sums gambling, and then lost
them. Finally he was arrested for narcotics smuggling. He was
tried and convicted. Yet throughout his life Charlie Ward
maintained his innocence of the charge on which he was
convicted.
Charlie Ward was thirty-four years old when he entered
Leavenworth. He had never been in jail before in spite of his
associates. And he was embittered. He vowed that no prison was
strong enough to hold him. He looked for a chance to make a
break.



Then something happened! Charlie chose to change his attitude
from negative to positive. He met the challenge to change with
PMA. Something within him told him to stop being hostile and to
become the best prisoner in the prison. From that very moment
the entire tide of his life began to flow in the direction most
favorable for him. By the simple change from negative to positive
thinking, Charlie Ward began to master himself.
He changed the direction of his aggressive personality. He
forgave the federal agents who had brought about his plight. He
quit hating the judge who sentenced him.
He took a real good look at the Charlie Ward of the past. And he
resolved to avoid the very appearance of evil in the future. He
looked around for ways to make his stay in prison as pleasant as
possible.
First he asked himself some questions. And for the first time in
his adult life he found his answer in books, Particularly The Book.
In his prison cell he began to read the Bible. He read it and reread
it. Thereafter, and up to the date of his death at the age of
seventy-three, he read the Bible every day for inspiration,
guidance and help.
Because of his change in attitude, and consequently in behavior,
he began to attract favorable notice from the prison officials. And
one day a convict clerk told him that a trusty in the power plant
was to be released in three months. Charlie Ward knew little
about electricity, but there were books on electricity in the prison
library. So he studied. He learned what these books could teach
him.
At the end of three months, Charlie was ready. He applied for the
job. Something about his mannerism and his tone of voice
impressed the deputy warden. That something was the


earnestness and sincerity of Charlie Ward's positive mental
attitude. He got the job!
Because he continued to study and work with PMA, Charlie
Ward became superintendent of the prison power plant with one
hundred and fifty men under him. He tried to inspire each one of
them to make the best of his situation.
When Herbert Hughes Bigelow, president of Brown & Bigelow
of St. Paul, Minnesota, arrived at Leavenworth on a conviction of
income tax evasion, Charlie Ward also befriended him. In fact, he
went out of his way to motivate Bigelow to adjust himself to his
environment. Mr. Bigelow was so appreciative of Charlie's
friendship and help that as his prison term approached its end, he
told Charlie, "You have been good to me. When you get out,
come to St. Paul. We will have a job for you."
Five weeks later Charlie was released from prison and went to St.
Paul. As he had promised, Mr. Bigelow gave Charlie a job. He
was given work as a laborer at $ a week. Because Charlie
worked with PMA, he became a foreman within two months.
After a year, he became a superintendent Finally Charlie was
made vice president and general manager. And when Mr.
Bigelow died, Charlie was made president of Brown & Bigelow;
he continued in this capacity until his own death many years later.
Under Charlie's management, sales rose from less than three
million dollars to over fifty million dollars annually. Brown &
Bigelow became the largest company of its kind.
Because of Ward's positive mental attitude and his desire to help
those less fortunate, he himself received peace of mind,
happiness, love, and the better things in life. By presidential
decree, his rights as a citizen were restored in acknowledgment of
his exemplary life. Those who knew him held him in the highest
esteem, and were themselves inspired to help others.


Perhaps one of his most unusual and commendable activities was
his employment of over five hundred men and women who had
come from prisons. They continued their rehabilitation under his
stern and understanding guidance and inspiration. He never
forgot that he too had been a convict. He wore a tag on his
bracelet with his old prison number as a symbol.
Charlie Ward had been sentenced to prison. That was good!
Why? Who knows what might have become of Charlie Ward had
he continued in the direction in which he was headed. But in
prison he met the challenge to change. And there he learned to
use PMA to solve his personal problems. He made his world a
better world to live in. He became a bigger and better man. No
one will ever know the exact number of the needy who have
prayed for blessings to Charlie Ward in response to their inner
thoughts
/#
'
! =/#

! J/ #
'
!
! =

Fortunately not everyone is faced with problems as severe as
those which Charlie Ward was called upon to meet and solve. But
there is a lesson in Charlie's story, in addition to the fact that he
changed his attitude from negative to positive. You will recall,
Charlie himself said "My greatest mistake was being with the
wrong companions." Negative attitudes are often contagious, and
bad habits are contagious. Let each of us look to our own
associations and be certain to keep them on the highest possible
level. One of the greatest services you can render to children is to
motivate them to motivate themselves to select the right kind of
friends and associates. Remember

)
- 

!

#
 !


#

!
J






!

=

Another force with which every human being has to contend, and
which, if not met with PMA, can cause physical, moral, and
mental destruction is the power of sex. Sex presents the greatest
challenge of change! Each human being hat the power to choose
for himself whether he will use the tremendous power of sex for
good or for evil. Each human being must contend with the
problems that will arise in his life because of sex.

<
One of God's greatest
gifts to mankind is the power to procreate a human being. Sex is
the means of procreation. It is power! Like all power, it can be
used for good or for evil.
Sex is a physical function of the body under the control of the
subconscious and conscious mind. It is inherited. The physical
sex organs, works of God, like all His creations, are good. The
little difference that makes the big difference between the power
of sex being a virtue or a vice is mental attitude.
The inherent emotion of sex is one of the most powerful forces of
the subconscious mind. The effects of its motivating power can
be observed long before adolescence. This power blends with and
intensifies the driving force of all other emotions.
When it is in conflict with the will of the conscious mind, the
power of imagination, as it affects the emotion of sex, has a
tendency to win unless the conscious mind uses its power to
affect, use, control or harmonize with the powers of the
subconscious. You have the power to choose. Choose wisely —
with PMA. Transmute sex into virtue! Thus you will win over
one of the greatest problems you win ever have to face in your
personal life. And you will be physically, mentally, and morally
better.


 Virtue is moral practice or
action, moral excellence; rectitude; valor; chastity. The seven
virtues are prudence, fortitude, temperance, justice, faith, hope,
and charity.
. Prudence — the ability to govern and discipline one's self
by the exercise of reason.
. Fortitude — strength of mind that enables a person to
encounter danger or bear pain or adversity with courage. It is the
possession of the stamina essential to face that which repels
or frightens one, or to put up with the hardships of a task
imposed. It implies triumph. Synonyms are grit, backbone, pluck
and guts.
. Temperance — habitual moderation in the indulgence of the
appetites and passions.
. Justice — the principle or ideal of just dealing or right action;
also conformity to this principle or ideal; integrity.
. Faith — trust in God.
. Hope — the desire with expectation of obtaining what is
desired, or belief that it is obtainable.
. Charity — the act of loving all men as brothers because they
are sons of God. It stresses benevolence and goodwill in giving
and in the broad understanding of others with kindly tolerance.
&

<
A crystal-clear answer can be found by you if you
search for it as you read and study this entire book. Results will
be achieved when you relate and assimilate the principles into
your own life.



But one must gain knowledge for himself. The following
suggestions may be helpful as you search for your answer while
reading
. Keep your mind on the things you want and off the things you
don't want. This means that you keep your mind on immediate,
intermediate, and distant desirable objectives. The instinct of sex
in the subconscious mind will be patient if it has hope that you
will fulfill life's mission. The boy or girl who is truly in love and
plans to marry will not have the sex problems he or she might
otherwise have.
. If there were more and often earlier marriages, there would be
fewer sex problems. Life's mission to procreate is fulfilled in
marriage; however, marry for love beyond the sex instinct.
. Lead a well-balanced, four-square life.
. Work long hours at a labor of love. It will keep you busy,
occupy your thoughts, and use up surplus energy.
. Develop a Magnificent Obsession. Study the significance to
be found in  Fifteen.
. Relate and assimilate into your own life the concepts in
 Two, "You can Change Your World!" and 
Seven, "Learn to See!"
. Select environment that will
your objectives.

develop you best towards

. Choose the self-motivators for self-suggestion that you believe
will help you. Memorize them. Make they will flash from your
subconscious mind to your conscious mind as autosuggestion.
Not all the problems of one's personal life, however, are of so
deep and penetrating a nature. Many times all that it takes to meet
an immediate problem is quick thinking, adaptability, and taking


a second look at the situation which is causing the problem. It
often takes only one idea, followed by action, to turn failure into
success.
+



In  on Chicago's North Michigan Avenue, in an
area now known as The Magnificent Mile, office space was going
begging. Building after building had empty floors one that was
half-rented was considered lucky. It was a bad year for business
and NMA hung over Chicago real estate like a cloud. You heard
such comments as, "No sense in advertising, there just isn't the
money around," or "What can you do? You can't fight the times."
Then into this gloomy picture came a building manager with
PMA. He had an idea. And he got into action!
This man was hired by Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance
Company to run a large building on North Michigan Avenue
which they had acquired in a mortgage foreclosure. When he took
the job the building was only ten per cent occupied. Within one
year it was  per cent rented, with a long waiting list. What
was the secret? The new manager accepted the problem of nodemand-for-offices as a challenge rather than a misfortune. Here
is what he did as he explained in an interview.
/' #
*<<

#

/#
#

=/#


!
=/' #
#

'

#

= /
#
#

*= / #

'

A= / #

!
!



D
!

!
!




=
/#
=

E= / #

!
#

;= 

!

#

=

/ #

!



! !

(

=

M= /
=/#
!

/ #
!

#
!

#

=

I reasoned
*= /
#

#

#
!

=
! 

#
#

!

#

=
!

!
!
# #
#
D # #

#

#

#

=

# #
#

#

=

A= 

!

(
#!
. !



!
=/ !



!

#
!

#

=

#

'=
E= /

 #
!

(

# (
#

#
=



!

=)


)

#

!
= )

!

=

#

!
#

AA
<<<

!=/
!

!

=
#
#

#
#
!

*<<

#
#

= $
= )
=
#

!
(

#

=

We would like you to think back over this story. Here was a man
faced with a most serious problem. He had a giant office building
on his hands that had nine empty offices in it for every one that
was occupied. And yet within a year, his building was  per
cent rented. Now right next door, up and down The Magnificent
Mile, there were dozens of office buildings standing idle and
practically empty.
The difference of course was the mental attitude which each
individual building manager brought to the problem. One man
said, "I have a problem. That's awful!" The other said, "I have a
problem. That's good!"
A man who seizes upon his problems as opportunities in disguise
and scrutinizes them for the good element that is going to be
there, is the man who understands the very core of PMA. The
man who develops an idea that can work and follows it with
action will turn failure into success.
Time after time the pattern repeats itself problems and
difficulties turn out to be the best things that could have happened
to us — provided we translate them into advantages.


As you recognize, the problem which the building manager faced
occurred during the Depression. Things were still plenty tough in
 when he solved this problem. But they had been much
worse.
Now the economic problems of the nation and of the world arose
as the result of the Depression. Depressions are caused by cycles
in the economic life of a nation or nations. But it is not necessary
to sit idly by. There is no need to be beaten and tossed to and fro
by the cycles of life You can meet the problem of cycles and
conquer it intelligently. In so doing, you can often acquire a
fortune.
( +
Many years ago Paul Raymond, Vice President in
charge of loans for the American National Bank and Trust
Company of Chicago, rendered a service bank's customers. He
sent them Dewey and Dakin's book Cycles. Subsequently many
of these clients made fortunes. They learned and understood the
theory of business cycles and trends. Some of them will be
among those who won't lose the fortunes they acquired regardless
of economic trends and changes.
Edward R. Dewey, who has been the director for The Foundation
for the Study of Cycles for many years, points out that every
living organism, be it an individual, business, or nation, grows to
maturity, levels off, and dies. What is equally important, he
indicates a solution whereby, regardless of the trend or cycle,
you, as an individual, can do something about it. You can meet
the challenge of change successfully. You can change the trend as
far as you and your interests are concerned, regardless of the
general trend, with new life, new blood, new ideas, new activity.
&
Before newspapers publicized the recession that began in the


latter part of , one of the bank's clients got into action. His
organization went after business aggressively with a positive
mental attitude. In  his company developed a premium
increase of over  per cent compared to the previous year which
had shown a  per cent increase. The entire industry, however,
had a downward trend.
Sometimes the cycle that presents a problem is not a cycle that
affects an industry, or an entire nation. It may be a cycle within
an individual business only. This problem, too, can be anticipated
and met. Witness the continual growth of many American
corporations, in spite of the fact that in the normal course of
events they would have grown to maturity, leveled off, and died.
E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Co., Inc., is an outstanding example.



It is unnecessary to point out that E. I. du Pont de
Nemours & Co., Inc. has continued to grow. But what is the
cause of its success? Why has it not followed the natural cycle of
growing to maturity, leveling off, and dying?
Du Pont has met the challenge of change with new life, new
blood, new ideas, new activity. Its executives have met this
problem with PMA and the determination to overcome it. They
have continued to engage in research and are constantly making
new discoveries, developing new products, and perfecting their
previous products. They inject new blood into their management,
and study and improve their sales methods.
Learn from their success!
The owner of a small business, or you as an individual, can study
and experiment. You can relate and assimilate the principles used
by such a large corporation. You too can continue to grow with
booster shots of new ideas, new life, new blood, new activity.


You can change a downward trend into an upward one. You can
be different! When others float downstream, you can move
upstream!
So many of the stories you have read and will read in this book
indicate that "if you have a problem – that’s good!" It’s good if
you learn to see how to turn adversity into seeds of equivalent or
greater benefit. You may still not see the principle; however, the
next chapter entitled "Learn to See" can help you.
-. '. >

. So you've got a problem? That's good! Why? Because every
time you meet a problem and tackle and conquer it with PMA,
you become a better, bigger and more successful person.
. Everyone has problems. Those with PMA turn their adversities
into seeds of equivalent or greater benefits.
. Your success, or failure, in meeting the problems presented by
the challenges of change will be determined by your mental
attitude.
. You can direct your thoughts, control your emotions and
ordain your destiny by recognizing, relating, assimilating and
applying the principles that are applicable to you to be found
in this book.
. God is always a good God.
. When you have a problem (a) ask for Divine Guidance; (b)
think; (c) state the problem, and (d) analyze it; (e) adopt the



PMA attitude "That's good!" (f) then change the adversity into
seeds of greater benefit.
. Charlie Ward is an outstanding example of a man who
successfully met the challenges of change. Prepare to meet
the challenges of change by developing PMA.
. Sex is the greatest challenge of change. Transmute the emotion
of sex into virtue.
. The seven virtues are prudence, fortitude, temperance, justice,
faith, hope, and charity. Success Through a Positive Mental
Attitude indicates how you can relate and assimilate these
qualities into your own life.
. One good idea followed by action can change failure into
success.
YOU'VE GOT A PROBLEM?
THAT'S GOOD!
FOR IT'S
THE SEEDS OF
GREATER BENEFITS
FOR THOSE WHO HAVE PMA



CHAPTER 
Learn to See
When he was born, George W. Campbell was blind. "Bilateral
congenital cataracts," the doctor called it.
George's father looked at the doctor, not wanting to believe. "Isn't
there anything you can do? Wouldn't an operation help?"
"No," said the doctor. "As of now, we know of no way to treat
this condition."
George Campbell couldn't see, but the love and faith of his
parents made his life rich. As a very young boy, he did not know
that he was missing anything.
And then, when George was six years old, something happened
which he wasn't able to understand. One afternoon he was
playing with another youngster. The other boy, forgetting that
George was blind, tossed a ball to him. "Look out! It'll hit you!"
The ball did hit George — and nothing in his life was quite the
same after that. George was not hurt, but he was greatly puzzled.
Later he asked his mother "How could Bill know what's going to
happen to me before I know it?"
His mother sighed, for now the moment she dreaded had arrived.
Now it was necessary for her to tell her son for the first time
"You are blind." And here is how she did it
''Sit down, George," she said softly as she reached over and took
one of his hands. "I may not be able to describe it to you, and you
may not be able to understand, but let me try to explain it this



way." And sympathetically she took one of his little hands in hers
and started counting the fingers.
"One — two — three — four — five. These fingers are similar to
what is known as the five senses." She touched each finger
between her thumb and index finger in sequence as she continued
the explanation.
"This little finger for hearing; this little finger for touch; this little
finger for smell; this one for taste," and then she hesitated before
continuing "this little finger for sight. And each of the five
senses, like each of the five fingers, sends messages to your
brain."
Then she closed the little finger which she had named "sight" and
tied it so that it would stay next to the palm of George's hand.
"George, you are different from other boys," she explained,
"because you have the use of only four senses, like four fingers
one, hearing — two, touch — three, smell — and four, taste. But
you don't have the use of your sense of sight. Now I want to show
you something. Stand up," she said gently.
George stood up. His mother picked up his ball. "Now hold out
your hand as if you were going to catch this," she said.
George held out his hands, and in a moment he felt the hard ball
hit his fingers. He closed them tightly around it and caught it.
"Fine. Fine," said his mother. "I never want you to forget what
you have just done. You can catch a ball with four fingers instead
of five, George. You can also catch and hold a full and happy life
with four senses instead of five — if you get in there and keep
trying." Now George's mother had used a metaphor, and such a



simple figure of speech is one of the quickest and most effective
methods of communicating ideas between persons.
George never forgot the symbol of "four fingers instead of five."
It meant to him the symbol of hope. And whenever he became
discouraged because of his handicap, he used the symbol as a
self-motivator. It became a form of self-suggestion to him. For he
would repeat "four fingers instead of five" frequently. At times of
need it would flash from his subconscious to his conscious mind.
And he found that his mother was right. He was able to catch a
full life, and hold it with the use of the four senses which he did
have.
But George Campbell's story doesn't end here.
In the middle of his junior year at high school the boy became ill,
and it was necessary for him to go to the hospital. While George
was convalescing, his father brought him information from which
he learned that science had developed a cure for congenital
cataracts. Of course, there was a chance of failure but — the
chances for success far outweighed those for failure.
George wanted so much to see that he was willing to risk failure
in order to see.
During the next six months four delicate surgical operations were
performed — two on each eye. For days George lay in the
darkened hospital room with bandages over his eyes.
And finally the day came for the bandages to be removed.
Slowly, carefully, the doctor unwound the gauze from around
George's head and over his eyes. There was only a blur of light.
George Campbell was still technically blind!


For one awful moment he lay thinking. And then he heard the
doctor moving beside his bed. Something was being placed over
his eyes.
"Now, can you see?" came the doctor's question.
George raised his head slightly from the pillow. The blur of light
became color, the color a form, a figure.
"George!" a voice said. He recognized the voice. It was his
mother's voice.
For the first time in his  years of life George Campbell was
seeing his mother. There were the tired eyes, the wrinkled, year-old face, and the knotted and gnarled hands. But to George
she was most beautiful.
To him — she was an angel. The years of toil and patience, the
years of teaching and planning, the years of being his seeing eyes,
the love and affection that was what George saw.
To this day he treasures his first visual picture the sight of his
mother. And, as you will see, he learned an appreciation for his
sense of sight from this first experience.
"None of us can understand," he says, "the miracle of sight,
unless we have had to do without it."
But George also learned something
that is very helpful to anyone interested in the study of PMA. He
will never forget the day he saw his mother standing before him
in the hospital room, and did not know who she was — or even
what she was — until he heard her speak. "What we see," George
points out, "is always an interpretation of the mind. We have to
train the mind to interpret what we see."


This observation is backed up by science. "Most of the process of
seeing is not done by the eyes at all," says Dr. Samuel Renshaw,
in describing the mental process of seeing. "The eyes act as hands
which reach 'out there' and grab meaningless 'things' and bring
them into the brain. The brain then turns the 'things' over to the
memory. It is not until the brain interprets in terms of comparative action that we really see anything."
Some of us go through life "seeing" very little of the power and
the glory around us. We do not properly filter the information that
our eyes give us through the mental processes of the brain. As a
result we often behold things without really seeing them at all.
We receive physical impressions without grasping their meaning
to us. We do not, in other words, put PMA to work on the
impressions that are sent to our brain.
Is it time to have your mental vision checked? Not your physical
vision — that is a matter for the medical specialists. But mental
vision, like physical vision, can become distorted. When it does
you can grope in a haze of false concepts… bumping and hurting
yourself and others unnecessarily.
The most common physical weaknesses of the eye are two
opposite extremes — nearsightedness and farsightedness. These
are the major distortions of mental vision, too.
The person who is mentally nearsighted is apt to over-look
objects and possibilities that are distant. He pays attention only to
the problems immediately at hand and is blind to the
opportunities that could be his by thinking and planning in terms
of the future. You are nearsighted if you do not make plans, form
objectives, and lay the foundation for the future.
On the other hand, the mentally farsighted person is apt to
overlook possibilities that are right before him. He does not see


the opportunities at hand. He sees only a dream-world of the
future, unrelated to the present. He wants to start at the top rather
than move up step by step — and he does not recognize that the
only job where you can start at the top is the job of digging a
hole.
+
?
So, in the process
of learning to see, you will want to develop both your near sight
and your far sight. The advantages to the man who knows how to
see what is directly in front of him are enormous. For years the
people in the little town of Darby, Montana, used to look up at
what they called Crystal Mountain. The mountain was given this
name because erosion had exposed a ledge of a lightly sparkling
crystal that looked something like rock salt. A pack trail was built
directly across the outcropping as early as . But it wasn't
until the year  —  years later — that anyone bothered to
stoop down, pick up a piece of the sparkling material, and really
look at it.
It was in this year  that two Darby men, Mr. A. E. Cumley
and Mr. L. I. Thompson, saw a mineral collection displayed in
the town. Thompson and Cumley became very excited. There in
the mineral display were specimens of beryl which, according to
the attached card, was used in atomic energy research.
Immediately Thompson and Cumley staked claims on Crystal
Mountain. Thompson sent a specimen of the ore to the Bureau of
Mines office in Spokane, together with a request to send an
examiner to see a "very large deposit" of the mineral. Later that
year the Bureau of Mines sent a bulldozer up the mountain and
scraped off enough of the outcropping to determine that here
indeed was one of the world's greatest deposits of extremely
valuable beryllium. Today, heavy earth-moving trucks struggle
up the mountain and work their way back down again, weighted
down with the extremely heavy ore, while at the bottom, virtually
waiting with dollar bills in their hands, are representatives of the


United States Steel Company and the United States Government,
each anxious to buy the highly valued ore. All because one day
two young men not only observed with their eyes, but took the
trouble to see with their minds. Today these men are well on their
way to being multimillionaires.
A mentally farsighted person could not have done what
Thompson and Cumley did — if his mental vision were distorted.
For he is the man who can see only far-off values while the
advantages that lie at his feet go un-claimed. Are there fortunes
right at your doorstep? Look about you. As you go about your
daily chores are there small areas of irritation? Perhaps you can
think of a way to overcome them — a way that will be helpful not
only to yourself but to others. Many a man has made a fortune by
meeting such homely needs. This was so of the man who
invented the bobby pin and the one who devised the paper clip. It
was so of the man who invented the zipper, and the metal pantsfastener. Look about you. Learn to see. You may find Acres of
Diamonds in your own backyard.
But mental nearsightedness can be just as much of a problem as
mental farsightedness. The man with this problem sees only what
is under his nose, while more distant possibilities go unclaimed.
He is the man who does not understand the power of a plan. He
does not understand the value of thinking time. He is so busy
with the problems that immediately confront him that he does not
free his mind to range into the distance, reaching for new
opportunities, seeking trends, getting the big picture.
Being able to see into the future is one of the most spectacular
accomplishments of the human brain. Down in the heart of the
citrus belt in Florida there is a little town called Winter Haven.
The surrounding country is farmland. Certainly it would be
considered by most people as an area entirely unsuited for a large
tourist attraction. It is isolated. It has no beach, no mountains,


only mile after mile of gently rolling hills with little lakes and
cypress swamps down in the valleys.
But to this region came a man who "saw" these cypress swamps
with an eye that others had not used. His name was Richard Pope.
Dick Pope bought one of these old cypress swamps, put a fence
around it, and has turned down offers of at least a million dollars
for the world-famous Cypress Gardens.
Of course, it really wasn't as simple as that. All along the line
Dick Pope had to "see" opportunities in his situation.
For instance, there was the question of advertising. Pope knew
that the only way he would be able to draw the public into such
an isolated place was through a barrage of advertising. But ads
cost money. So what Dick Pope did was quite simple. He went
into the popular photography business. He set up a photo supply
house at Cypress Gardens, sold his visitors film and then taught
them how to take spectacular shots of the Garden. He hired
skilled water skiers. He put them through intricate performances
while over a loudspeaker he announced to the public exactly what
camera settings they should use in order to catch the action. And
then, of course, when these travelers went back home, the very
best trip pictures were always of Cypress Gardens. They gave
Dick Pope the very best kind of advertising there is — word-ofmouth recommendations, with pictures!
This is the kind of creative seeing that we all need to develop. We
need to learn how to look at our world with fresh eyes — seeing
the opportunities that lie all about us, but simultaneously looking
into the future for the chances that are there.
Seeing is a learned skill. But like any skill it must be exercised.



*

We
may think we recognize our own talents; yet in this respect we
may be blind. Let's illustrate with an example of a teacher who
needed to have her mental vision checked. She was both
nearsighted and farsighted. For she could not see either the
present or the future potential abilities and capacities of her
students, or their points of view.
Now everyone — the great and the near great — had to have a
starting point. They weren't born brilliant and successful. As a
matter of fact, some of our greatest men were regarded as quite
stupid at times during their lives. It was not until they grasped a
positive mental attitude and learned to comprehend their
capabilities and envision definite goals that they started their
climbs to success. But there was one young man, in particular,
whom his teachers thought "a stupid, muddle-headed blockhead."
The youngster sat and drew pictures on his slate. He looked about
and listened to everybody else. He asked "impossible questions"
but refused to reveal what he knew, even under the threat of
punishment. The children called him "dunce," and he generally
stood at the foot of his class.
And this boy was Thomas Alva Edison. You will be inspired
when you read the life story of Thomas A. Edison. He attended
primary school for a total period of less than three months. The
teacher and his schoolmates told him that he was stupid. Yet, he
became an educated man after an incident in his life prompted
him to turn his talisman from NMA to PMA. He developed into a
gifted person. He became a great inventor.
What was that incident? What happened to Edison that changed
his whole attitude? He told his mother about hearing the teacher
tell the inspector at school that he was "addled" and it wouldn't be
worthwhile to keep him in school any longer. His mother


marched off to school with him and told all within range of her
voice that her son, Thomas Alva Edison, had more brains than the
teacher or the inspector.
Edison called his mother the most enthusiastic champion a boy
ever had. And from that day forward he was a changed boy. He
said, "She cast over me an influence which has lasted all my life.
The good effects of her early training I can never lose. My
mother was always kind, always sympathetic, and she never
misunderstood or misjudged me." His mother's belief in him
caused him to view himself in an entirely different light. It caused
him to turn his talisman to PMA and take a positive mental
attitude regarding studying and learning. This attitude taught
Edison to view things with deeper mental insight, that enabled
him to comprehend and develop inventions which benefited
mankind. Perhaps the teacher didn't see because the teacher
wasn't genuinely interested in helping the boy. His mother was.
You have a tendency to see what you want to see.
To hear does not necessarily imply attention or application. To
listen always does. Throughout Success Through a Positive
Mental Attitude we urge you to listen to the message. This means
to see how you can relate and assimilate the principle into your
own life.
Perhaps you'd like to see how you can relate the principle of the
following experience into your own life
Dr. Roy Plunkett, a DuPont chemist, made an experiment. He
failed. When he opened the test tube after the experiment, he
observed that it apparently contained nothing. He was curious. He
asked himself, "Why?" He didn't throw the tube away as others
might have done under similar circumstances. Instead, he
weighed the tube. And, to his surprise, it weighed more than a


tube of like make and design. So, again, Dr. Plunkett asked
himself, "Why?"
In searching for the answer to his questions, he discovered that
marvelous transparent plastic, tetrafluoroethylene, commonly
known as Teflon. During the Korean War, the United States
government contracted for Du Pont's entire output.
When there is something you don't understand, ask yourself
"Why?" Look at it more closely. You may make a great
discovery.
+
%
Asking yourself or others questions
about things that puzzle you may reward you richly. This very
procedure led to one of the world's greatest scientific discoveries.
A young Englishman, while vacationing on his grandmother's
farm, was relaxing. He was lying on his back under an apple tree
and engaging in thinking time. An apple fell to the ground. This
young man was a student of higher mathematics.
"Why does the apple fall to the ground?" he asked himself. "Does
the earth attract the apple? Does the apple attract the earth? Does
each attract the other? What is the universal principle involved?"
Isaac Newton used his power to think and he made a discovery.
To see mentally is to think. He found the answers he was looking
for; the earth and the apple attracted each other, and the law of
attraction of mass to mass applies to the entire universe.
Newton discovered the law of gravitation because he was
observant and sought the answers to what he observed. Another
man, because he exercised his powers of observation and acted
upon what he perceived, found happiness and great wealth.



Newton asked himself questions. The other man sought expert
advice.
&
In Toba,
Japan, in the year , when he was just eleven years old,
Kokichi Mikimoto continued his father's business as the village
noodle maker. His father had developed an illness that prevented
him from working. The youngster supported his six brothers,
three sisters, and his parents. In addition to making the noodles
daily, young Mikimoto had to sell them. He proved to be a good
salesman.
Mikimoto had previously been tutored by a Samurai who taught
Exemplification of true faith consists of acts of kind-ness and love
for one's fellowmen, not mere formal prayers uttered by rote.
And with this basic PMA philosophy of positive action,
Mikimoto became a doer. He developed the habit of converting
ideas into reality.
At the age of twenty he fell in love with the daughter of a
Samurai. The young man knew that his future father-in-law
would not bless his daughter's marriage with a noodle maker.
Therefore, he was motivated to harmonize with this known
power. He changed his occupation and became a pearl merchant.
Like many persons who achieve success in any part of the world,
Mikimoto kept searching for specific knowledge that would help
him in his new activity. He, like the great industrialists of our
day, sought help from a university. Professor Yoshikichi
Mizukuri told Mikimoto of a theory of one of the laws of nature
that had never been proved.



The professor said "A pearl is formed in an oyster when a
foreign object, like a grain of sand, is stuck in the oyster. If the
foreign object does not kill the oyster, nature covers the object
with the same secretion that forms the mother-of-pearl in the
lining of the oyster's shell."
Mikimoto was thrilled! He could hardly wait to get the answer to
the question he asked himself, "Can I raise? pearls by deliberately
planting a tiny foreign object in the oyster and letting nature take
its course?"
He converted a theory into a positive action once he learned to
see.
Mikimoto had been taught to see by that university professor.
And then he used the power of his imagination. He engaged in
creative thinking. He used deductive reasoning. He decided that if
all pearls were formed only when a foreign object entered the
oyster, he could develop pearls by using nature's laws. He
could plant foreign objects in the oysters and force them to
produce pearls. He learned to observe and act and he became a
successful man.
Now a study of Mikimoto's life indicates that he employed all
the  success principles. For knowledge doesn't make you
successful. But application of the knowledge will. Action!
Many of the ideas which come to us as we learn to see with
fresh eyes will strike others as bold. These ideas can either
frighten us or, if we act on them, make our fortunes. Here is
another true story of pearls. This time the hero is a young
American, Joseph Goldstone. He sold jewelry to Iowa farmers,
door-to-door.



Then one day in the heart of the Depression he learned that the
Japanese were producing beautiful cultured pearls. Here was
quality, and it could be sold at a fraction of the cost of natural
pearls!
Joe "saw" a great opportunity. In spite of the fact that it was a
Depression year, he and his wife, Esther, converted all their
tangible assets into cash and set out for Tokyo. They landed in
Japan with less than $ — but they had their plan and lots of
PMA.
They obtained an interview with Mr. K. Kitamura, head of the
Japanese Pearl Dealers Association. Joe was aiming high. He told
Mr. Kitamura of his plan for merchandising Japanese cultured
pearls in the United States, and asked Mr. Kitamura for an initial
credit of $, in pearls. This was a fantastic sum, especially
in a period of depression. After several days, however, Mr.
Kitamura agreed.
The pearls sold well. The Goldstones were well on their way to
becoming wealthy. A few years later, they decided they wanted to
establish their own pearl farm, which they did with the help of
Mr. Kitamura. Once again they "saw" opportunity where others
had seen nothing. Experience proved that the mortality rate of
oysters into which a foreign object had been artificially inserted
was over  per cent.
"How can we eliminate this great loss?" they asked themselves.
After much study, the Goldstones began to use on the oysters the
methods employed in hospital rooms. The outside shells were
scraped and scrubbed to reduce the danger of infection to the
oyster. The "surgeon" used a liquid anesthetic that relaxed the
oyster. Then he slipped a tiny clam pellet into each oyster as a
nucleus for the pearl that was to be formed. The incision was


made with a sterilized scalpel. Then the oyster was put into a
cage, and the cage was dropped back into the water. Every four
months cages were raised and the oysters were given a physical
checkup. Through these techniques,  per cent of the oysters
lived and developed pearls, and the Goldstones went on to
acquire a fabulous fortune.
Time and again we see how men and women have become
successful after they learned to apply mental perception. The
ability to see is much more than the physical process of taking
light rays through the retina of the eye. It is the skill of
interpreting what you see and applying that interpretation to your
life and the lives of others.
Learning to see will bring to you opportunities that you never
dreamed existed. However, there is more to success through
PMA than learning mental perception. You must also learn to act
on what you learn. Action is important because through action
you get things done.
Don't wait any longer. Read The Secret of Getting Things Done in
the next chapter and move another rung up the ladder of success
through PMA.
-. '. 

. Learn to see! Seeing is a learned process. Nine-tenths of
seeing takes place in the brain.
. Four fingers instead of five this was the symbol whereby
George Campbell, the blind boy, could catch and hold a full
and happy life. How can you use this symbol?



. Seeing is learned through association. George Campbell's
first sight of his mother became meaningful to him only
when he recognized her voice.
. Is it time to have your mental vision checked? when it is
distorted, you can grope around in a haze of false concepts,
bumping and hurting yourself and others unnecessarily.
Does your mental vision become clearer year by year?
. Take a look — & good look — and recognize what you see.
There may be Acres of Diamonds in your own backyard!
. Don't be nearsighted — look to the future. Cypress Gardens
became a reality because Richard Pope saw it as a definite
future objective.
. See another person's abilities, capacities, and viewpoint.
You may be overlooking a genius. The story of Thomas
Edison is a good example.
. Do you see how you can relate and assimilate the principles
of Success Through a Positive Mental Attitude into your own
life?
. Learn from nature. How? Ask yourself some questions, as
Isaac Newton did. If you don't know the answers, get expert
advice.
. Convert what you see into reality by action. Mikimoto
converted a theory into a fortune in pearls. Goldstone
recognized, related and applied the principles and methods
used in hospitals to save human lives as being applicable to
saving the lives of oysters in producing cultured pearls.
OPEN YOUR MIND
AND
LEARN TO SEE


CHAPTER 
The Secret of Getting
Things Done
In this chapter you will find the secret of getting things done. You
will also receive a self-motivator so powerful that it will
subconsciously force you to desirable action, for it is in reality a
self-starter. Yet you can use it at will. When you do, you
overcome procrastination and inertia.
If you do the things you don't want to do, or if you don't do the
things that you do want to do, then this chapter is for you.
Those who achieve greatness employ this secret of getting things
done. Take, for example, Maryknoll Father James Keller. Father
Keller had been developing an idea for quite some time. He
hoped to motivate "little people to do big things by encouraging
each to reach beyond his or her own little circle to the outside
world." The Biblical command, "go ye forth into all the world"
was to him the symbol of an idea whereby the mission he had in
mind could be fulfilled.
When he responded to this command, he employed the secret of
getting things done. And when he did, he went into action. This
happened in . It was then that he organized the Christophers
— an organization most unusual.
It has no chapters, no committees, no meetings, no dues. It
doesn't even have a membership in the usual sense of the word. It
simply consists of people — no one can say how many —
dedicated to an ideal. The Christophers operate on the concept
that it is better for people to "do something and pay nothing" than
to "pay dues and do nothing."



What is the ideal to which each is dedicated?
Each Christopher is dedicated to carry his religion with him
wherever he goes throughout the day — into the dust and heat of
the market place, into the highways and byways, into the home.
And thus he brings the major truths of his faith to others.
The thrilling story is told by the Rev. James Keller in You Can
Change the World. It came about because he conceived and
believed in an ideal. But he did little or nothing about it until he
responded to the secret of getting things done.
You get the feel of this secret from the statement of E. E.
Bauermeister, supervisor of education and correctional counselor
at California Institution for Men, Chino, California, who told the
authors
"I always tell the men in our self-adjustment class that too often
what we read and profess becomes a part of our libraries and our
vocabularies, instead of becoming a part of our lives."
Remember the Biblical statement For the good that I would, I do
not; but the evil which I would not, that I do. Now how can you
train yourself to get into action immediately when it is desirable?
And then we told Mr. Bauermeister how the good things we read
and profess can become a part of our lives. We gave him the selfstarter for getting things done.
How do you make the secret of getting things done a part of your
life? By habit. And you develop habit through repetition. "Sow
an action and you reap a habit; sow a habit and you reap a
character; sow a character and you reap a destiny," said the great
psychologist and philosopher William James. He was saying that
you are what your habits make you. And you can choose your


habits. You can develop any habit you wish when you use the
self-starter.
Now what is the secret of getting things done and what is the selfstarter that forces you to use this great secret?
The secret of getting things done is to act The self-starter is the
self-motivator DO IT NOW!
As long as you live, never say to yourself, "DO IT NOW!" unless
you follow through with desirable action. Whenever action is
desirable and the symbol DO IT NOW! flashes from your
subconscious mind to your conscious mind, immediately act.
Make it a practice to respond to me self-starter DO IT NOW! in
little things. You will quickly develop the habit of a reflex
response so powerful that in times of emergency or when
opportunity presents itself, you will act. Say you have a phone
call that you should make but you have a tendency to
procrastinate. And you have put off making that phone call.
When the self-starter DO IT NOW! flashes from your
subconscious to your conscious mind Act. Make that phone call
immediately.
Or suppose, for example, that you set your alarm clock for 
A.M. Yet when the alarm goes off, you feel sleepy, get up, turn
off the alarm, and go back to bed. You will have a tendency to
develop a habit to do the same thing in the future. But if your
subconscious mind flashes to the conscious DO IT NOW! then
come what may — DO IT NOW! Stay up! Why? You want to develop the habit of responding to the self-starter DO IT NOW!
In  Thirteen you will read how one of the authors bought
a company with one million six hundred thousand dollars in net
liquid assets with the seller's own money. This became a reality


because at the proper time the buyer responded to the self-starter
DO IT NOW!
Now H. G. Wells learned the secret of getting things done. And
H. G. Wells was a prolific writer because he did. He tried never
to let a good idea slip away from him. While an idea was fresh,
he immediately wrote down the thought that occurred to him.
This would sometimes happen in the middle of the night. No
matter. Wells would switch on the light, reach for the pencil and
paper that were always beside his bed and scribble away. And
then he would drop off to sleep again.
Ideas that might have been forgotten were recalled when he
refreshed his memory by looking at the flashes of inspiration that
had been written down immediately when they occurred. This
habit of Wells' was as natural and effortless to him as smiling is
to you when a happy thought occurs.
Many persons have the habit of procrastination. Because of it,
they may miss a train, be late for work, or even more important
— miss an opportunity that could change the whole course of
their lives for the better. History has recorded how battles have
been lost someone put off taxing desirable action.
New students in our PMA Science of Success course sometimes
state that the procrastination habit is the one they would like to
eliminate. And then we reveal to them the secret of getting things
done. We give them the self-starter. We may motivate them by
telling them the true story of what the self-starter meant to a war
prisoner in World War II.
,
= Kenneth Erwin
Harmon was a civilian employee for the Navy at Manila when the
Japanese landed there. He was captured and held in a hotel for
two days before he was sent to a prison camp.


On the first day, Kenneth saw that his roommate had a book
under his pillow. "May I borrow it?" he asked. The book was
Think and Grow Rich. Kenneth began to read. As he read, he met
the most important living person with the invisible talisman
imprinted with PMA on one side and NMA on the reverse.
Before he started to read it, he had the feeling of despair. He
fearfully looked ahead to possible torture-even death — in the
prison camp. But now as he read his attitude became one inspired
by hope. He had a craving to own the book. He wanted it with
him during the dread days ahead. In discussing Think and Grow
Rich with his fellow prisoner, he realized that the book meant a
great deal to the owner.
"Let me copy it," he said.
"Sure, go ahead," was the response.
Kenneth Harmon employed the secret of getting things done. He
swung into immediate action. In a fury of activity he began
typing away. Word by word, page by page, chapter by chapter.
Because he was obsessed with the possibility that it would be
taken away at any moment, he was motivated to work night and
day.
It was a good thing that he did for within an hour after the last
page was completed, his captors led him away to the notorious
Santo Tomas prison camp. He had finished in time because he
started in time. Kenneth Harmon kept the manuscript with him
during the three years and one month he was a prisoner. He read
it again and again. And it gave him food for thought. It inspired
him to develop courage, make plans for the future, and retain his
mental and physical health Many prisoners at Santo Tomas were
permanently injured physically and mentally by malnutrition and
fear — fear of the present and fear of the future. "But I was better
when I left Santo Tomas than when I was interned — better


prepared for life — more mentally alert," Kenneth Harmon told
us. You get the feel of his thinking in his statement "Success
must be continually practiced, or it will take wings and fly away."
Now is the time to act.
For the secret of getting things done can change a person's
attitude from negative to positive. A day that might have been
ruined can become a pleasant day.
Jorgen Juhldahl, a
student at the University of Copenhagen, worked one summer as
a tourist guide. Because he cheerfully did much more than he was
paid to do, some visitors from Chicago made arrangements for
him to tour America. The itinerary included a day of sightseeing
in Washington, D. C., while he was en route to Chicago.
On arriving in Washington, Jorgen checked in at the Willard
Hotel, where his bill had been pre-paid. He was sitting on top of
the world. In his coat pocket was his lane ticket to Chicago; in his
hip pocket was his wallet with his passport and money. Then the
young man was dealt a shocking blow!
While getting ready for bed, he found that his wallet was missing.
He ran downstairs to the hotel desk.
''We'll do everything we can," said the manager.
But the next morning the wallet had still not been located. Jorgen
Juhldahl had less than two dollars change in his pockets. Alone in
a foreign country, he wondered what he should do. Wire his
friends in Chicago and tell them what had happened? Go to the
Danish embassy and report the lost passport? Sit at police
headquarters until they had some news?



Then, all of a sudden, he said "No! I won't do any of these
things! I'll see Washington. I may never be here again. I have one
precious day in this great capital. After all, I still have my ticket
to get me to Chicago tonight, and there'll be plenty of time then to
solve the problem of the money and the passport. But if I don't
see Washington now I may never see it. I've walked miles at
home, I'll enjoy walking here.
"Now is the time to be happy.
"I am the same man that I was yesterday before I lost my wallet. I
was happy then, I should be happy now — just to be in America
— just to have the privilege of enjoying a holiday in this great
city.
"I won't waste my time in futile unhappiness over my loss."
And so he headed off, on foot. He saw the White House and the
Capitol, he visited the great museums, he climbed to the top of
the Washington Monument. He wasn't able to take the tour of
Arlington and some other places he'd wanted to see. But what he
did see, he saw more thoroughly. He bought peanuts and candy
and nibbled on them to keep from getting too hungry.
And when he got back to Denmark, the part of his American trip
he remembered best was that day on foot in Washington — a day
that might have gotten away from Jorgen Juhldahl if he had not
employed the secret of getting things done. For he knew the truth
in the statement. NOW is the time. He knew that NOW must be
seized before it becomes yesterday-I-could-have…
Incidentally, to round off his story, five days after that eventful
day Washington police found both wallet and passport and sent
them to him.



One of the things that
often prevents us from seizing the NOW is a certain timidity in
the face of our own inspirations. We're a little bit afraid of our
ideas when they first occur to us. They may seem novel or
farfetched. There's no doubt about it It takes a certain boldness to
step out on an untested idea. Yet it's exactly this kind of boldness
that often produces the most spectacular results. The well-known
writer, Elsie Lee, tells about Ruth Butler and her sister Eleanor,
the daughters of a nationally-known New York furrier.
"My father was a frustrated painter," says Ruth, "He had talent,
but the need to earn a living left him no time to build a reputation
as an artist. So he collected painting. Later, he started buying
paintings for Eleanor and me. Thus, the girls developed a
knowledge and appreciation fine art, along with an impeccable
sense of taste. As they grew older, friends would consult them on
what types of paintings they should buy for their homes. Often
they would loan pieces from their collection for brief periods.
One day Eleanor woke Ruth up at  A.M. "Don't start arguing,
but I have a terrific idea! We're going to form a Master Mind
alliance."
"Now what in the world is a Master Mind alliance?" Ruth asked.
"A Master Mind alliance is coordination of knowledge and effort,
in a spirit of harmony, between two or more people, for the
attainment of a definite purpose. And that's just what we're going
to do. We're going into the business of renting paintings!"
And Ruth agreed. It was a terrific idea. They set to work the same
day — although friends tried to warn them of dangers Their
valued paintings might be lost or stolen; and there might be law
suits and insurance problems. But they went right on working —



accumulating $ in capital and talking their father into loaning
them the basement of his fur shop, rent free.
"We hauled , paintings from our own collections in among
the coat forms," Ruth recalls, "and ignored father's sad and
disapproving eyes. The first year was grim — a real struggle."
But the novel idea paid off. Their company, known as the New
York Circulating Library of Paintings, became a success — with
about  paintings constantly on rental to business firms,
doctors, lawyers and for use in homes. One valued client was an
inmate of the Massachusetts Penitentiary for eight years. He
wrote humbly that perhaps the Library wouldn't rent to him,
considering his address. The paintings went to him rent free
except for transportation costs. In return Ruth and Eleanor
received a letter from prison authorities telling how the paintings
were used in an art appreciation course that benefited many
hundreds of prisoners. Ruth and Eleanor started their business
with an idea. And then they backed their idea up with immediate
action. The results were a profit to themselves and increased
pleasure and happiness for many others.
W. Clement Stone toured
the Asiatic and Pacific areas as one of seven executives serving
as representatives of the National Sales Executives International.
On a Tuesday, Stone gave a talk on motivation to a group of
businessmen at Melbourne, Australia. The following Thursday
evening, he received a phone call. It was from Edwin H. East,
manager of a firm that sold metal cabinets. Mr. East was excited
"Something wonderful has happened! You'll be as enthusiastic as
I am when I tell you about it!"
"Tell me about it. What did happen?"



"An amazing thing! You gave your talk on motivation Tuesday.
In your talk you recommended ten inspirational books. I bought
Think and Grow Rich and started to read it that evening. I read for
hours. The next morning I started reading it again and then I
wrote on a piece of paper
"My major definite aim is to double last year's sales this year.
The amazing thing is I did it in forty-eight hours."
"How did you do it?" Mr. Stone asked East. "How did you double
your income?"
East responded "In your speech on motivation, you told how Al
Allen, one of your Wisconsin salesmen, tried to sell cold-canvass
in a certain block. You said that Al was lucky because he worked
all day and didn't make a sale.
"That evening, you said, Al Allen developed inspirational
dissatisfaction. He determined that the following day he would
again call on exactly the same prospects and sell more insurance
policies that day than any of the other representatives in his group
would sell all week.
"You told how Al Allen completely canvassed the same city
block. He called on the same people and sold  new accident
contracts. I remembered your statement 'It can't be done some
may think, but — Al did it.' I believed you. I was ready.
"I remembered the self-starter you gave us DO IT NOW!
"I went to my card records and analyzed ten 'dead' accounts. I
prepared what might previously have seemed to be an enormous
program to present to each. I repeated the self-starter DO IT
NOW! several times. And then I called on the ten accounts with a
positive mental attitude and made eight large sales. It is amazing


— truly amazing — what PMA will do for the salesmen who use
its power!"
Now Edwin H. East was ready when he heard the talk on
motivation. He listened to the message that was applicable to
him. He was searching for something. And he found what he was
looking for. Our purpose in relating this particular story is that
you, too, have read about Al Allen. But you may not have seen
how you could apply the principle to your own experience.
Edwin H. East did. And you can, too. You can apply the
principles in each of the stories you read in Success Through a
Positive Mental Attitude.
Now, however, we want you to learn the self-starter, DO IT
NOW!
Sometimes a decision to act immediately can make your wildest
dreams come true. It worked that way for Manley Sweazey.

<
Manley loved hunting and
fishing. His idea of the good life was to hike fifty miles into the
woods with his pole and his rifle, and hike back a couple of days
later exhausted, muddy, and very happy.
The only trouble with this hobby was that it took too much time
out from his work as an insurance salesman. Then one day as he
reluctantly left a favorite bass lake and headed back to his desk,
Manley had a wild idea. Suppose, somewhere, there were people
living in a wilderness — people who needed insurance. Then he
could work and be out-of-doors at the same time! And indeed,
Manley discovered, there was such a group of people The men
who worked for the Alaska Railroad. They lived in scattered
section-houses strung out along the -mile length of the track.
What if he were to sell insurance to these railroad men, and to the
trappers and gold miners along the route?


The same day that the idea came to him, Sweazey began making
positive plans. He consulted a travel agent and began packing. He
didn't pause to let doubts creep in and frighten him into believing
that his idea might be scatterbrained… that it might fail. Instead
of picking the idea apart for its flaws, he took a boat to Seward,
Alaska.
He walked the length of the railroad many, many "Walking
Sweazey," as he was called, became a welcome sight to these
isolated families, not only because sold insurance when no one
else had thought them worth bothering with, but because he
represented the outside world. He went the extra mile. For he
taught himself how to cut hair, and did it free of charge. He
taught himself how to cook, too. Since the single men ate mostly
canned foods and bacon, Manley, with his culinary skills, was a
welcome guest. And all the while he was doing what came
naturally. He was doing what he wanted to do tramping the hills,
hunting, fishing and — as he puts it, "living the life of Sweazey!"
In the life insurance business there is a special place of honor
reserved for men who sell over a million dollars worth of
business in one year. It is called the Million Dollar Round Table.
Now the remarkable and almost unbelievable part of Manley
Sweazey's story is that having acted on his impulse, having taken
off for the wilds of Alaska, having walked the railroad where no
one else had bothered to go, he did his million dollars of
business, and more, in a single year, to take his place at the
Round Table.
And none of it would have happened if he had hesitated to
employ the secret of getting things done when his "wild" idea
came to him.
Memorize the self-starter DO IT NOW!



DO IT NOW! can affect every phase of your life. It can help you
do the things you should do, but don't feel like doing. It can keep
you from procrastinating when an unpleasant duty faces you. But
it can also help you as it did Manley Sweazey, to do those things
that you want to do. It helps you seize those precious moments
which, if lost, may never be retrieved. The endearing word to a
friend, for example. The telephone call to an associate, just telling
him that you admire him. All in response to the self-starter DO IT
NOW!
Here is an idea to help you get started. Sit
down and write yourself a letter, telling the things you always
intended to do as though they had already been accomplished —
some personal, some charitable, and others community projects.
Write the letter as if a biographer were writing about the
wonderful person you really are when you come under the
influence of PMA. But don't stop there. Use the secret of getting
things done. Respond to the self-starter DO IT NOW!
Remember, regardless of what you have been or what you are,
you can be what you want to be if you act with PMA.
The self-starter DO IT NOW! is an important self-motivator. It is
the important step towards understanding and applying the
principles of the next chapter entitled, "How to Motivate
Yourself."
PILOT NO. 
Thoughts to Steer By
. It is better for people to do something and pay nothing, than to
pay dues and do nothing.
. "Too often what we read and profess becomes a part of our
libraries and our vocabularies, instead of becoming a part of


our lives." Stop and think about this. You have knowledge of
principles that could help you achieve any worthwhile goal in
life you might desire — but do you make these principles a
part of your life?
. "Sow an action and you reap a habit; sow a habit and you reap
a character; sow a character and you reap a destiny." What
habits of thought or action, in any human activity, would you
like to acquire? What habits would you like to eliminate? You
should know how to acquire desirable habits and eliminate the
undesirable if you have learned how to recognize principles
revealed to you in this book and apply them.
. The secret of getting things done is DO IT NOW!
. As long as you live, when the suggestion DO IT NOW! flashes
from your subconscious to your conscious mind to do that
which you ought to do, immediately follow through with
desirable action. It's a habit that will make you an outstanding
achiever.
. The burden of learning is upon the person who Wants to learn.
If you want to learn how you can achieve anything in life that
doesn't violate the laws of God or the rights of your fellow
men, now is the time to begin to study and learn the concepts
that can teach you how to achieve your goals. Study and apply
the principles contained in Success Through a Positive Mental
Attitude — don't only read what is written.
. Now is the time to act.
DO IT NOW!



CHAPTER 
How to Motivate Yourself
What is motivation?
Motivation is that which induces action or determines choice. It
is that which provides a motive. A motive is the "inner urge" only
within the individual which incites him to action, such as an
instinct, passion, emotion, habit, mood, impulse, desire or idea.
It is the hope or other force which starts an action in an attempt to
produce specific results.
(
When you know principles that
can motivate you, you will then know principles that can
motivate others. Conversely, when you know principles that can
motivate others, you will then know principles that can motivate
you.
How to motivate yourself is the purpose of this chapter. How to
motivate others is the purpose of  Ten. How to motivate
yourself and others with a positive mental attitude is the purpose
of Success Through a Positive Mental Attitude. In essence, this is
a book on motivation.
Our purpose in illustrating specific experiences of the success and
failures of others is to motivate you to desirable action.
Now, therefore, to motivate yourself, try to understand principles
that motivate others — to motivate others, try to understand
principles that motivate you.



Establish the habit of motivating yourself with PMA… at will.
And then you can direct your thoughts, control your emotions and
ordain your destiny.
What

(
is the magic ingredient?
One man, in particular, found it. Here is his story.

Some years ago, this man, a successful cosmetic manufacturer,
retired at the age of sixty-five. Each year thereafter his friends
gave him a birthday party, and on each occasion they asked him
to disclose his formula. Year after year he pleasantly refused;
however, on his seventy-fifth birthday his friends, half jokingly
and half seriously, once again asked if he would disclose the
secret.
"You have been so wonderful to me over the years that I now will
tell you," he said. "You see, in addition to the formulas used by
other cosmeticians, I added the magic ingredient"
"What is the magic ingredient?" he was asked.
"I never promised a woman that my cosmetics would make her
beautiful, but I always gave her hope."
Hope is the magic ingredient!
Hope is a desire with the expectation of obtaining what is desired
and belief that it is obtainable. A person consciously reacts to that
which to him is desirable, believable, and attainable.
And he also subconsciously reacts to the inner urge that induces
action when environmental suggestion, self-suggestion, or
autosuggestion cause the release of the powers of his


subconscious mind. His response to suggestion may develop
obedience that is direct, neutral, or in reverse action to a specific
symbol. In other words, there may be various types and degrees
of motivating factors.
Every result has a given cause. Your every act is the result of a
given cause — your motives.
Hope, for example, motivated the cosmetic manufacturer to build
a profitable business. Hope also motivated women to buy his
cosmetics. Hope will motivate you, too.
Every
thought you think, every act in which you voluntarily engage, can
be traced back to some definite motive or combination of
motives. There are ten basic motives which inspire all thoughts,
all voluntary actions. No one ever does anything without having
been motivated to do it.
When it comes to learning how to motivate yourself for any given
purpose, or how to motivate others, you should have a clear
understanding of these ten basic motives. Here they are
. The desire for SELF-PRESERVATION
. The emotion of LOVE
. The emotion of FEAR
. The emotion of SEX
. The desire for LIFE AFTER DEATH
. The desire for FREEDOM OF BODY AND MIND
. The emotion of ANGER
. The emotion of HATE
. The desire for RECOGNITION and SELF-EXPRESSION
. The desire for MATERIAL GAIN



As you have been reading this chapter, perhaps you felt that it
contains food for thought. A good sandwich contains nine-tenths
bread and one-tenth meat. Unlike a sandwich, this chapter is ninetenths meat. That is the way the authors planned it. We hope you
will chew and digest it carefully.
 As you read Success Through a
Positive Mental Attitude you clearly see that negative emotions,
feelings, and thoughts are harmful to the individual. But are there
times when these are good?
Yes, negative emotions, feelings, thoughts and attitudes are good
— at the proper time and under the right circumstances.
For that which is good for the species of man is good for the
individual. It is clear that in the process of evolution, negative
thoughts, feelings, emotions, and attitudes protected the
individual. In fact, these negatives prevented the species of man
from becoming extinct. And these negatives in a person, like the
negative forces of a bar magnet, effectively repelled the forces of
the negative powers others. This has been. And because it is a
universal law, it will continue to be.
Now culture, refinement, and civilization, like man himself, have
also evolved from a primitive state. And the more cultured,
refined, and civilized a society or environment may be, the less
need there is for the individual to use these negatives. But in a
negative, antagonistic environment, a person with common sense
will use these negative forces with PMA to oppose the evil with
which he is faced.
And because you live in a country with laws designed to bring
the greatest good to the greatest number; because the rights of tat
individual are protected, because you are in a society and
environment of culture, refinement, and the highest form of


civilization those negative thoughts, feelings, emotions, and
passions which lie dormant within you from your hereditary past
are not now necessary to solve the problems which primitive man
could not otherwise have solved. For he was a law unto himself.
And the law of the individual has become subservient to the law
of society for his benefit.
Now let's clarify these concepts. Let's take anger, hate, and fear
as examples.
Anger and hate. Righteous indignation against evil is a form of
anger and hate. The desire to protect one's nation when attacked
by an enemy, or the desire to protect the weak against the
criminal attack of the madman to save human life is good. To kill
to accomplish this, when necessary, is an example of the worst
form of all negative feelings and emotions used to achieve a
worthy purpose. In our society the patriotism of a soldier or the
fulfillment of duty by a police officer are virtues.
Fear. With every new experience and in every new environment
nature protects you from potential danger by alerting you through
some shade of the emotion of fear. You can be assured that the
bravest individual will, in a new environment, at first, experience
an awareness that is a conscious or subconscious feeling of
timidity or fear. If he finds that the fears are not beneficial to him,
the person with PMA will neutralize an undesirable negative
emotion by substituting a positive one.
 Man is the only member of the
animal kingdom who, through the functioning of his conscious
mind, can voluntarily control his emotions from within, rather
than be forced to do so by external influences.
And he alone can deliberately change habits of emotional
response. The more civilized, cultured and refined you are, the


more easily you can control your emotions and feelings if you
choose to do so.
Emotions are controlled through the combination of reason and
action. When fears are unwarranted, or harmful, they can and
should be neutralized.
How?
While your emotions are not always immediately subject to
reason, nonetheless they are immediately subject to action. For
you can use reason to determine the needlessness of the negative
emotion and thus motivate yourself to action. You can substitute
fear with a positive feeling. How do you do this?
One effective means is through self-suggestion, in fact selfcommand, with a one word symbol that incorporates what you
want to be. Thus, if you are afraid and want to be courageous,
give the self-command be courageous with rapidity several times.
Follow this with action. If you want to be courageous, act
courageously.
How?
Use the self-starter Do It Now! And then get into action.
In this and the next chapter you will see how to control your
emotions and actions by using self-suggestions. In the meantime
Keep your mind on the things you should and do want and off the
things you shouldn't and don't want.
Are you
among the hundreds of thousands of persons throughout the
world who have read the Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin, or


among the tens of thousands who have read Frank Bettger's book
How I Raised Myself from Failure to Success in Selling? If not,
we recommend that you read both. These books contain a
formula that always succeeds when applied with PMA.
In his autobiography, Franklin indicates that he endeavored to
help Benjamin Franklin just as the most important living person
wants to help you. He wrote (language modernized)
"My intention being to acquire the habit of all these virtues, I
judged it would be well not to distract my attention by attempting
the whole at once, but to fix it on them at a time; and when I
should be master of that, then to proceed to another, and so on,
until I should gone through the thirteen, and, as the previous
acquisition of some might facilitate the acquisition of certain
others, I arranged them with that view… "
The names of these virtues as Franklin fitted than, together with
the precepts (self-motivators for self-suggestion) he gave each
one, are
*= ) %. @ $ D

J

'

=
A= /

$ D

'

#

!

J

=

E= @& @D

J
! =

;= @

 )/$D

@
!#



! #
#

J
=

M= @

/)-D

% '


#

=
>= /$& )@-D

! J
!

+= /$ @/)-D

#
J
=

!

J

'


?


=



'

G= I )/ D

?

'


!
=
H= %& @ )/$D

! J
!

?

'

=
*<= 

$ /$

D

)




**= )@ $N/ /)-D

=




 !!

*A= "

)/)-D

=

@

?

# '



#
=

*E= "%/ /)-D

/!

I

=

Franklin wrote further "Conceiving then that, agreeably to the
advice of Pythagoras in his Golden Verses, daily examination



would be necessary, I contrived the following
conducting that examination.

method for

"I made a little book, in which I allotted a page for each of the
virtues. I ruled each page with red ink, so as to have seven
columns, one for each day of the week, marking each column
with a letter for the day. I crossed these columns with thirteen
red lines, making the beginning of each line with the first letter of
one of me virtues, on which line, and in its proper column, I
might mark, by a little black spot, every fault I found upon
examination to have been committed respecting that virtue upon
that day." Here is the chart

TEMPERANCE
Eat not to dullness; drink not to elevation.
S.

M.

T.
S.
*
*
O.
**
*
R.
F.
I.
S.
J.
M.
C.
T.
C.
H.
Form of the pages

T.

W.

*
*
*
*

T.

F.

*

*
*

S.

*
*

Now it is as important to know how to use a formula as it is to
know the formula. Here's how to use your Knowledge


A FORMULA IN ACTION
. Concentrate on one principle for an entire week, every day of
the week. Respond by proper action every time an occasion
arises.
. And then, start the second week on the second principle of
virtue. Let the first be taken over by your subconscious mind.
Should an occasion arise when the employment of a previous
principle flashes into your conscious mind, use the self-starter
DO IT NOW! and then ACT! Continue to concentrate on one
principle at a time each week and leave the others to be
executed by the habits established in your subconscious as the
occasion arises.
. When the series is completed, stat over again. Thus at the end
of a year, you will have completed the entire cycle four times.
. When you have acquired a desired characteristic, substitute a
new principle for a new virtue, attitude, or activity that you
may wish to develop.
Now you have just read the method Benjamin Franklin used to
help Benjamin Franklin. As Success Through a Positive Mental
Attitude is a self-help book, it would be wise for you to study
Franklin’s method and see how you can apply the principles. In
the chapter entitled "How to Motivate Others" you will see how
Frank Bettger raised himself from failure to success by
employing Benjamin Franklin’s plan.
If you decide to start your own plan, and don't know exactly what
principles to start with you could begin with the  virtues used
by Benjamin Franklin; or you may prefer the  success
principles described in  Two.



Let's tell about the first

'
Fuller Brush man.

Alfred C. Fuller, the first of the "Fuller Brush men," came from a
poor farm family living in Nova Scotia. Al couldn't seem to hold
a job. In fact, during the first two years of trying to earn a living,
he lost three jobs.
But then a radical change came into Fuller's life. For he tried
selling brushes. Right then Fuller was motivated. He began to
realize that his first three jobs were not the kind of work suited to
him.
He didn't like them.
The work didn't come to him naturally. But selling did. And he
saw immediately that he would do well as a salesman. He liked
his work. So Al conditioned his mind to do the best selling job in
the world. He was terrific.
And having succeeded as a salesman, he set a goal in his climb up
the ladder of success. It was to go in business for himself. Now
this goal fitted nicely with his personality, provided he was in
sales.
Alfred C. Fuller did quit selling brushes for someone else. And he
bad more fun than ever before. He manufactured his own brushes
in the evening, then sold them the next day. And when his sales
began to mount, he rented space in an old shed for eleven dollars
a month and hired an assistant who made the brushes for him
while he concentrated on sales. The end result from the boy who
lost his first three jobs?



The Fuller Brush Company, with thousands of door-to-door
salesmen and millions of dollars in annual income! You see, you
are more apt to succeed if you do what comes naturally.
But there are greater motivating factors than losing a job, making
money, or success in business. The desire for self-preservation is
the strongest on the list.
Capt. Edward V. Rickenbacker was one of
the most successful and highly esteemed men in the United
States.
Capt Eddie, as he was affectionately called, is a symbol of faith,
integrity, the joy of hard work and common sense.
Those who met him, heard his lectures or read his book Seven
Came Through are themselves inspired by the symbol he
represents.
The airplane carrying Capt. Eddie and his crew fell into the
Pacific. No trace of the wreckage or the men could be found the
first week. Nor the second week. But the world was thrilled with
the news that Capt. Eddie was saved on the st day.
Just picture Capt. Eddie and his crew on three rafts in the Pacific
with nothing in sight but the sea and the sky. Picture these men
these men, if you will, suffering from the shock of hitting the
water when their plane crash landed, suffering from the heat of
the burning sun, hungry, thirsty. Then picture the three rafts tied
together each morning and evening, with each member of the
crew bowing his head in prayer or listening intently as the rd
Psalm or the verses from Matthew - were read "Therefore
take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we
drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed? (For after all these
things do the Gentiles seek) for your heavenly Father knoweth


that ye have need of these things. But seek ye first the kingdom
of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added
unto you. Take therefore no thought for the morrow for the
morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto
the day is the evil thereof."
Now, you have the picture, so let's hear directly from Capt. Eddie
himself as he wrote in his book
"As I have already stated, there was no time that I lost faith in our
ultimate rescue, but the others did not seem to share this state of
mind fully with me. My companions clearly began to think of
what lay beyond death and to think of it in terms of their own
lives.
"I say in all truth that at no time did I ever doubt we would be
saved.
"I tried to impart my own philosophy to these men hoping to
stimulate their desire to carry on. It was based upon the simple
observation that the longer I have had to suffer under trying
circumstances, the more certain I was to appreciate my
deliverance. This is part of the wisdom that comes to older men."
Should you ask us how to motivate yourself, we would list the
basic motives. They are repeated here!
First, the desire for self-preservation; then the emotion of love,
fear, sex. The desire for life after death; and freedom of body and
mind would follow. And after that, the emotion of anger; and
hate. Then the desire for recognition and self-expression. And last
in the list of the ten basic motives would be the desire for
material wealth.



In the following chapter you will see how any one of these, or a
combination, motivates others.
PILOT NO. 
Thoughts to Steer By
. Motivation is that which induces action or determines choice.
It is the hope or other force which starts an action in an attempt
to produce specific results.
. Motivate yourself with PMA. Remember what the mind of
man can conceive and believe the mind of man can achieve
with PMA. Recognize the possibility of the improbable.
. Hope is the magic ingredient in motivating yourself and others.
. Negative emotions, feelings, thoughts, and attitudes are good at
the proper time and under the right circumstances.
. The  basic motives are self-preservation, love, fear, sex,
desire for life after death, freedom of body and mind, anger,
hate, desire for recognition and self-expression, and the desire
for material wealth.
. Motivate yourself as Benjamin Franklin motivated himself.
Develop your own chart. DO IT NOW! If you have difficulty
listing  virtues you would like to acquire or goals you would
like to reach, you can start with one and then add to your list as
you realize what virtues or goals you desire. Like Benjamin
Franklin, have a self-motivator for each. Important Inspect
your progress daily.



. Capt. Eddie Rickenbacker had developed a strong faith that
came to his rescue in time of need. How can you strengthen
your faith to help you at the time of your greatest need?
. Are you prepared so that you can and will apply your faith at
the time of your greatest need?
HOPE IS THE MAGIC INGREDIENT
IN MOTIVATING
YOURSELF
AND OTHERS



CHAPTER 
How to Motivate Others
It is important to know how to motivate others in an effective
manner and in a desirable direction. Throughout life you play
dual parts in which you motivate others and they motivate you
parent and child, teacher and pupil, salesman and buyer, master
and servant — you take each part.
&
A boy two-and-one-half years
of age was walking with his father after a very heavy Christmas
Day dinner. When they had walked about a block and a half, the
youngster stopped, looked up at his father with a smile, and said
"Daddy… " then hesitated. His father responded, "Yes?" The boy
paused for a second or two and continued, "If you say please, I'll
let you carry me," Now, who could resist this type of motivation?
Even a newborn baby motivates his parents to action.
And, of course, a parent motivates a child. We saw this illustrated
by Thomas Edison and his mother. Having confidence in a
youngster gives him confidence in himself. When the child feels
that he is wrapped in the warm, secure belief that he will do well;
he is actually able to do better than he knows. His defenses are
relaxed; his guard down he is able to stop spending emotional
energy protecting himself from the possible hurts of failure;
instead he spends his energy reaching for the probable rewards of
success. He is relaxed. Confidence has had a measurable effect on
his ability — it has brought out the best in him. "My mother was
the making of me," said Edison. And Napoleon Hill himself had
an experience in this direction. He speaks about it in this way
/#

/ #
##

!





=
!

' 
$

# !

 #

"


=
! 
#
=% # !
/ #
!
!=

=/

! ?
#

 /
# / #

!
#

!
!
=
# !
#
!

#
# #

#

#

#!

!

#
'
/

! #

!

=)

! #

# !

! = %

'
# # =

#

!


!

! = /
!
#

!

$

!

!

#
#

= )

#


!

!

=

=
#

/

#

!

!
#
# '
= ) #
="

!

=
'

!

#

/

,

?



= $
#

!=
%

!
'

#
!
'

#
# #
!



#

!
!

=/#

!
!
 !
'

!
'

#
!

#

! '
!
!
!
=

!
=
! ="
!

So you can motivate others by having faith in them. Faith, rightly
understood, is active, not passive. Passive faith is no more a force
than sight is in an eye that does not observe. Active faith steps
out on its belief and risks failure because it assumes it will
succeed.
When you motivate others by having faith in them, then you must
have an active faith. You must commit your belief. You must say,
"I know that you are going to succeed in this job, so I have
committed myself and others to your success. We are here,
waiting for you… "
When you have that kind of faith in another man, he will succeed.
Now faith can be expressed in a letter. In fact, a letter is an
excellent tool for expressing one's thoughts and motivating
another person.
Anyone who writes a
letter affects the subconscious mind of the receiver through
suggestion. And the power of this suggestion is, of course,
dependent upon several factors.
If you are a parent, for example, and your son or daughter is away
at school, you can accomplish that which you might not
otherwise achieve. You can grasp the opportunity (a) to mold the
character of your child; (b) to discuss matters that you might



hesitate or never take the time to discuss in conversation; and (c)
to express your inner thoughts.
Now a boy or girl may not readily accept advice when it is given
verbally. For environment and emotions involved at the time of
the conversation might prevent this. And yet the same boy or girl
would treasure the same advice received in a carefully written,
sincere letter.
To a son or daughter away from home a letter with all of its
contents, including advice, is most welcome. And if it is properly
written, it may be read frequently, studied, and digested.
And the executive or sales manager who writes the right type of
letter to his salesmen can motivate them to break all previous
records. Likewise the salesman who writes his sales manager will
benefit from this tool of motivation.
Now to write a letter, one must think. Therefore, the writer should
crystallize his ideas on paper. And he can ask questions to direct
the recipient's mind in the desired channels. In fact he can ask a
question to obtain a letter in return. Or when the person he would
like to hear from does not write, he, like an advertising expert,
can use a bait. That's what J. Pierpont Morgan did.
.
J. Pierpont
Morgan proved there is at least one way to get college students to
answer a letter. His sister had complained that her two college
sons just wouldn't write home. Mr. Morgan said that he could get
the boys to respond immediately if he sent a letter. And then his
sister challenged him to prove it. So he wrote each nephew and
received an immediate reply from both.
Surprised, his sister asked, "How did you do it?"



Morgan handed the letters to her and she saw that both contained
interesting information about college life and thoughts of home.
But the postscript on each was similar. One read "The ten dollars
you said was enclosed in your letter wasn't received!"
(
<
A successful sales manager knows that
one of the most effective means to motivate a salesman is to set
an example when working with him in the field. W. Clement
Stone has inspired many people with the story he tells about how
he trained a salesman who Jived at Sioux City, Iowa. Here's the
way he tells it
/

!
#

#
&

#
! '


=
=

# '
="

#
D /

 / # 
=$ #
'

!
"
#
!



/

#
# #
=
/



# '
!
#

#


#
! '

=
! # .%
!

#
!

=
#
!

!


!
"
&

#

# /
# /#
#

/

/
! !
#
=

D "
J

#


!
=/'

"
= )


!



,/

#

' #

! '
'


/
=/

=$ #
! =

"
!

!
=

!

&

#

,)

!

=
!

#
=



!


!
!
# !
=

!
#
/ !

=

'

!

#

#

!
#

/

!



/
!
.

#
#

!
.
.

!

=

/

! ! (


!
.
!
 
!
 )
/
'

#
#
'= $ #



=

#

#

!
!

#

/


=

!

= /


#


=

=
#

!

=
#

'#


J#
!

=


!
#



! 

D

#
=

#

=
'



.#

/

/

$ ##

&

!

#

=

/
!

'

,

/

!

"
"

#
&

!

=)

.% =

=)
#

#


#

!
#
$% = $ # / ' #
"
&

!
=)

/ ' #

!
$% =

#
=

$ #
$% =  /
=
! /
$ #

.% =
#

#
'

!
=

&
/#

.%
=


#

#

!=
)

!
!



!

#
# '

!

=



#

There are many ways to motivate a person, but a most effective
way is through an inspirational book.

 ,
+ The most important factors to success in
selling are, in order of importance (a) inspiration to action; (b)
knowledge of a successful sales technique for the particular
product or service — which is termed know-how; and (c)
knowledge of the product or service itself, activity knowledge.
Now, these same three principles can be related to success in any
business or profession.
In the story that you have just read you can assume that the
salesman had knowledge of the sales know-how and knowledge
of the service he was selling. But he did lack the most important
ingredient — inspiration to action.
Many years ago, Morris Pickus, a well-known sales executive
and sales counselor, gave W. Clement Stone a copy of Think and
Grow Rich. Since then, he has used inspirational books such as
those mentioned in Success Through a Positive Mental Attitude to
help salesmen develop inspiration to action. Mr. Stone knows that
inspiration and enthusiasm are the life of a sales organization.
And because the flame of inspiration and enthusiasm will be
extinguished unless the fuel that feeds it is kept replenished, Mr.
Stone has made it a habit to see that his representatives receive
inspirational, self-help action books frequently. And this is in
addition to weekly and monthly publications that are intended to
act as mental vitamins.
+

As a boy Walter Clarke of Walter Clarke Associates, Providence,
Rhode Island, intended to be a doctor. But when he grew older,
he thought he wanted to become an engineer. And he studied
engineering.


At Columbia University, however, he found the study of the
functioning of the human mind so interesting and challenging that
he changed from engineering to psychology. And finally he
received his Master's Degree.
Walter Clarke worked as a personnel officer in Macy's
Department Store and several other well-known concerns. At that
tune the known psychological tests developed the specific
information for which they were intended an applicant's I.Q.,
aptitude, and personality. But something important was missing!
Walter endeavored to find the missing factor. He thought "An
engineer can select the proper part and put it in its place so that a
machine will function efficiently. And that is exactly what I want
to do with people. I want to select the right person for the right
job."
You see, Walter, like many personnel officers, found people fail
on their job even though their psychological tests indicated that
they had sufficient intelligence, aptitude and personality to
succeed on the job. "Why then do we have so much absenteeism,
turn-over, and failure?" he asked himself. "What's the missing
factor?"
Now the answer to this question became so simple and obvious
that it is truly amazing that other psychologists had not
discovered it. For you see a person is more than a mechanical
body. He is a mind with a body. He succeeds or fails because he
is — or is not — motivated.
Therefore, Walter endeavored to develop an analysis technique
that would
BC/
!


J

BC
!

#

!
J

BC/

#

!

=
Also, he endeavored to develop a technique that could be used to
analyze the requirements of a given job successfully.
And because he worked hard and continued to search, Walter
Clarke found and recognized exactly what he was looking for.
For he developed what he called Activity Vector Analysis, better
known as AVA. It is based on semantics, specifically the
reaction of the individual to word symbols. From the answers
given, by the applicant, Clarke designed a chart. And he likewise
came up with a formula for designing a similar diagram for any
specific job.
Now when the diagram of the applicant corresponded with that of
the job, he had a perfect combination.
Why?
For then the applicant would have a job doing the kind of work
that came naturally to him. And a person will do what he likes to
do — it's fun.
Now the sole purpose of AVA as conceived by Walter Clarke is
to help business management in (a) the selection of personnel;
(b) management development; (c) cutting the high cost of
absenteeism; (d) personnel turnover.
Walter Clarke achieved a definite major aim. Now for many
years W. Clement Stone kept searching for a scientific working
tool that could aid him in his efforts to help the representatives


under his supervision to achieve success in solving their personal,
family, social, and business problems. He was looking for a
simple, accurate and usable formula that would eliminate
guesswork and save time when applied to a specific individual in
a given environment.
Therefore when he heard of AVA, Mr. Stone investigated and
immediately recognized that it was the working tool that he had
so long been looking for. He could see that AVA might be used
for purposes far beyond that for which it was conceived. And
when he studied under Walter Clarke, his conclusions were
confirmed.
For when you know (a) what the personality traits of the
individual are; (b) what his environment is; (c) what motivates
him, you then can motivate that individual.
&
While reading Success
Through a Positive Mental Attitude, you have seen the
importance of semantics, word symbols, suggestion, selfsuggestion, and autosuggestion. This was particularly true when
you read  Four. Now Mr. Stone combined this knowledge
with what he learned from AVA.
And thus he made what to him was a great discovery in the
technique of motivating other persons.
For the discovery was with PMA you can be what you want to
be, if you are willing to pay the price. This is true regardless of
your past experiences, aptitude, I.Q. or environment. Remember
— you have the power to choose.
Now you don't have to study AVA to learn how to motivate
yourself and others. But it could certainly help you. For you can



use the proper technique when you know what motivates an
individual.
And the simple technique that you can use to help you motivate
yourself and others is based on the use of suggestion, selfsuggestion, and autosuggestion. Let's be specific
. If for example a salesman is timid and his job requires him to
be aggressive, then
BC)

!

!
= "

!
!
!
BC
!
#

= "
#

!
!!
#
! #

!
(!

#
=



!

#

!
#

D

#
 



 " #
!
=/
* '

!

#

#

#
(

D 

. When a sales manager discovers that one of his men is deceitful
or dishonest, he will have a talk with his representative. And if he
sees the representative wants to cure the fault, then
BC )



!
= "
 !


#
!
!!
' ' 
!&



'


#

=

=

BC
#
!
#






BC

 #

!
="

!
!
#
= " #

#

#
(!
#

!

!
! '
D "
(
D 

* '
Now this plan should be easy for you to understand as it is
illustrated frequently throughout this book.
And because you understand its effectiveness, you yourself will
use it.
And in addition, you, unlike the hundreds of thousands of persons
who have read Benjamin Franklin's Autobiography, will now
immediately use Franklin's method to achieve success. You,
unlike them, have been given The Secret of Getting Things Done
DO IT NOW!

+ *
;Yes, many hundreds
of thousands of persons have read Benjamin Franklin's
Autobiography. Yet they didn't learn how to use the success
principles contained in it. But at least one man did Frank Bettger.
He listened to the messages that were applicable to him. For he
had a problem he was a failure in business. And he was
searching for a workable, down-to-earth formula that would help
him help himself. And because he knew what he was looking for,
he discovered Franklin's secret.
Franklin indicated that he owed all of his success and happiness
to just one idea a formula for personal achievement Now Bettger


recognized that formula and used it What happened? He raised
himself from failure to success. He tells us about it in his great,
motivating book, How I Raised Myself from Failure to Success in
Selling.
Now, why shouldn't you use Franklin's formula for personal
achievement? You can, if you will. If the authors of this book
succeed in motivating you to use this one idea, you too will, like
Bettger, be able to raise yourself from failure to success. Or, if
you are not a failure, then you will — through the use of
Franklin's method — be able to obtain what you seek be it
wisdom, virtue, happiness, health, or wealth.
Now Bettger wrote out his objectives on thirteen separate cards.
The first one is entitled "Enthusiasm." The self-motivator is To
be enthusiastic ACT enthusiastic. As the great teacher and
psychologist, William James, has so conclusively proved the
emotions are not immediately subject to reason, but they are
always immediately subject to action.
And the action can be physical or it can be mental. A thought can
be just as stimulating and effective as a deed in changing an
emotion from negative to positive. In such an instance the act, be
it physical or mental, precedes the emotion.
+ Because the purpose of Success
Through a Positive Mental Attitude is to help you help yourself,
and because the authors want you to get into action, we shall now
illustrate how we motivate individuals in an audience to action
through the Franklin-Bettger System.
Here's how we have motivated many thousands of students to
apply the Franklin-Bettger plan using the card "Enthusiasm" and
the self-motivator To be enthusiastic act enthusiastic. We call a
student to the front of the lass and give him a simple yet effective


lesson that he will learn immediately. Here's how we do it — try
it. Here is the dialogue that would take place between the instructor and student
(Note The dialogue of the instructor is in bold-face type. The
student's answers are set in italics.)
Do you want to feel enthusiastic?
Yes.
Then learn the self-motivator To be enthusiastic act
enthusiastic. Now repeat this phrase.
To be enthusiastic act enthusiastic.
Right! What is the key word in the affirmation?
Act.
That's right Let's paraphrase the message and thus you will
learn the principle and be able to relate and assimilate it into
your own life. If you want to be sick, what do you do?
Act sick
You're right. If you want to be melancholy, what do you do?
Act melancholy.
Right again! And if you want to be enthusiastic, what do you
do?
To be enthusiastic — act enthusiastic.



We then proceed to point out that you can relate this selfmotivator to any desirable virtue or personal aim. Thus we might
take justice as an example, and a card could read To be just,
ACT just.
And then the instructor would proceed
@ ! !
!
)

#

!

'

*=


=#
=/#
#



%

$ #/#
D

')

!



'

#


A=

%

!
'-

-

!
#

!

'


)

' #

!

 !

#

'
!! 
!

!
'

#

!
#

#
#

!

=

#

=

#
=)
#

!
!



=
')

!
!

=

#

="
!

#
#



#

M=

=

#

' !

;= 

=
' #

#
E= "

%
=

'
!

= !


=



>=

')
@ ! ! 
'
#

!

'
!
!
#

=
! =-

=

+=

!
'




=

)
; Now in the previous chapter you have read the
thirteen principles used by Benjamin Franklin. And here you
have been told that enthusiasm is the first of the thirteen
principles used by Frank Bettger. And you know that a Positive
Mental Attitude is the first of the  Success Principles.
Therefore, if you have not already done so, start the first of your
own  cards with the heading "Develop a Positive Mental
Attitude." Follow through with a card for each of the  Success
Principles and — use Franklin's method to achieve results.
Your action on the self-starter DO IT NOW at this time would
prove conclusively that you can motivate yourself. You can! And
if you purposely motivate yourself, you will find it easy to
motivate others.
And now that you know how to motivate yourself; and others,
you are ready to receive the Key to the Citadel of Wealth. The
next chapter answers the question Is There a Short Cut to
Riches?
-. '. /@

. Throughout life you play dual parts in which you motivate
others and they motivate you. Learn and apply the art of
motivation with PMA.



. Motivate others to have confidence in themselves by showing
them that you have faith in them and faith in yourself.
. A letter can change a life for the better. Start the habit of
motivating your loved ones by writing letters containing
wholesome, good suggestions.
. Motivate others by example.
. When you want to motivate, say it with an inspirational, selfhelp action book.
. If you know what motivates a person — you can motivate him
if you learn the art of motivation with PMA.
. Motivate others by suggestion. Motivate yourself by selfsuggestion.
. While your emotions are not always subject to reason,
nonetheless they are subject to action. If there is an instance
you recall in which you might experience the emotion of fear,
what action do you think you could take to neutralize it?
. To become enthusiastic, act enthusiastically!
. To speak enthusiastically and overcome timidity and fear (a)
talk loudly; (b) talk rapidly; (c) emphasize important words;
(d) hesitate where there is a period, comma or other
punctuation in the written word; (e) keep a smile in your voice
so that it isn't gruff; and (f) use modulation.
. Start the first of your  PMA success cards. DO IT NOW!



ANYTHING IN LIFE
WORTH WORKING FOR
IS WORTH
PRAYING FOR!




A



CHAPTER 
Is There a Short Cut to Riches?
Is there a short cut to riches?
A short cut is defined as a way of accomplishing something
more directly and quickly than by ordinary procedure. It is a route
more direct than that ordinarily taken.
And the man who takes the short cut knows his destination. He
knows the route that is more direct. Yet he will never arrive at his
destination unless he starts and continues toward it regardless of
the interruptions he encounters or the obstacles he meets.
In  Two we listed the  success principles as
*= .
A= &
E=
;=
M=
(
>= ) !
+=
G=
H= .
*<=
**= 
*A= ) !#
*E=
*;= 
*M= 
*>= %
*+= 

%
!
'
!

!
'
!
!

!
!

!



Now why do we repeat the  success principles?
We want to show you the short cut to riches. We want you to take
the most direct route.
Now to take the most direct route, you must necessarily think
with PMA… and a positive mental attitude results from the
application of these success principles.
The word think is a symbol. Its meaning for you depends upon
who you are.
Who are you?
You are the product of your heredity, environment, physical
body, conscious and subconscious mind, experience, and
particular position and direction in time and space, and something
more, including powers known and unknown.
When you think with PMA — you can affect, use, control, or
harmonize with all of them.
Now only you can think for you.
Therefore, the short cut to riches for you can be expressed in a
six-word symbol
)

'#

.%

#@



For if you really think with PMA, you will automatically follow
through with action. You will employ the PMA principles
expressed in this book — principles that will help you achieve
any goal that doesn't violate the laws of God or the rights of your
fellow men.
-. '. //


A short cut to riches Think with PMA and Grow Rich!
IF YOU HAVE PMA,
YOU CAN
DO IT
IF
YOU BELIEVE YOU CAN!



CHAPTER 
Attract — Don’t Repel — Wealth
Whoever you are — regardless of your age, your education, or
your occupation — you can attract wealth. You can also repel it.
We say "Attract — don't repel — wealth."
This chapter tells you how you can make money. Would you like
to be rich? Be truthful with yourself. Of course you would. Or —
are you afraid to be rich?
Perhaps you're sick and because of this, you don't try to acquire
wealth. If this be the case, just remember the experience of Milo
C. Jones about whom you read in  Two.
Or, if you are a, patient in a hospital, you can attract wealth by
engaging in study, thinking, and planning time as George Stefek
did.
"
+;Time after time as we have studied
the careers of successful men, we have discovered that they date
their own success from the day they picked up a selfimprovement book. Never underestimate the value of a book.
Books are tools, providing inspiration which can launch you onto
a bold new program and which can also light the dark days that
any such program entails.
George Stefek was convalescing at the Veterans Administration
Hospital in Hines, Illinois. There he discovered by accident the
value of thinking time. Financially — he was broke. While
George was convalescing, he had a great deal of time on his
hands. There wasn't too much to do except read and think. He
read Think and Grow Rich. And he was ready.



An idea occurred to him. Many laundries, George knew, fold
their newly ironed shirts over a piece of cardboard to keep the
shirts stiff and free from wrinkles. By writing a few letters,
George learned that these shirt boards cost the laundries about
$. per thousand. His idea was to sell the boards for $. a
thousand; however, each one would carry an advertisement. The
advertisers would, of course, pay for the space, and George
would make a profit.
George had an idea and he tried to make it work.
When he left the hospital, he got into action!
New in the advertising field, he had his problems. But he finally
developed successful sales techniques through what others term
"trial and error" and we term "trial and success."
George continued the custom he had started in the hospital to
engage in study, thinking and planning time each day.
Even when George's business was moving ahead swiftly, he
decided to increase his sales by increasing the efficiency of his
service. The shirt boards, when withdrawn from the shirts, were
not retained by the laundries' customers.
Now, he asked himself the question "How can I get families to
keep these shirt boards with the advertisements on them?" The
solution flashed into his mind.
What did he do? On one side of the shirt board he continued to
print an advertisement in black and white or in colors. On the
other side he added something new — an interesting game for the
children, a delicious recipe for the wife, or a provocative
crossword puzzle for the whole family. George tells about one
husband who complained that his laundry bill had gone up in a
sudden, unaccountable way. Then he discovered that his wife was


sending in shirts to the laundry which ordinarily he could have
worn another day, just to get more of George's recipes!
But George didn't stop there. He was ambitious. He wanted to
expand his business still further. Again he asked himself the
question "How?" And he found the answer.
George Stefek gave the entire $. per thousand he received
from the laundries to the American Institute of Laundering. The
Institute, in turn, recommended that each member help himself
and his trade association by using George Stefek's shirt boards
exclusively.
And thus George made another important discovery the more
you give of that which is good and desirable — the more you get!
Now a carefully planned thinking time session brought George
Stefek considerable wealth. He discovered that a time apart is
essential to any successful attraction of riches.
It is in quiet that our best ideas occur to us. Don't make the
mistake of believing that by a frantic kind of dashing around you
are being your most effective and efficient self. Don't assume that
you are wasting tune when you take time out for thought.
Thought is the foundation upon which all else is built by man.
Now it isn't necessary for you to go to a hospital to establish the
habit of reading good motivating books, to think or to make
plans. And your thinking, study, and planning sessions need not
be too lengthy. If you invest only one per cent of your time in a
study, thinking, and planning session it will make an amazing
difference in the speed with which you reach your goals.
Your day has , minutes in it. Invest one per cent of that time
in a study, thinking and planning session. And you will be


astounded at what those fourteen minutes do for you. For it may
surprise you to find that when you develop this habit you will
receive constructive ideas almost any time or anywhere you
might be while doing the dishes, or riding the bus, or while
taking a bath.
Be certain to use two of the greatest, yet simplest working tools
ever invented — tools used by a genius like Thomas Edison — a
pencil and a piece of paper. For he always had handy — paper
and pencil. And thus you, like him, will record the ideas that
come to you day or night.
Another requirement to attract wealth is to learn how to set your
goal. It is important for you to understand this. Few people, even
when they realize its importance, really understand how to set a
goal.
There are four important things to

keep in mind.
BC 

' = )

B C
)

#


'
!

#

#
! !

!
!

!
'

?

=

D

!

BC

=

#
$ #

=
!

#
!

=-



!

#



)

$
# !

=
' 

! ?
#

!




#

! '
!
?

= )
#
!!

=

!

!

=
!

#

#

!

' D

#
#

'

#,

/

!

!



!



!

=

/

#



#
/
!

" #


!

!
'



#

#
'=

!

/# '

!
!

)

/

=
?




#



#








/

#
! 

! '
!
=

!

#

BC

#

!!

#
)

D
!

'



#

=
'
#

#

!
!

!

!=
!

!





#

= 

#

' #

#

#
=

' ##
!#

# 

#
#
!

#
!

#

?
#
'
=

+
The important thing after setting a goal is
taking action. A sixty-three-year-old grandmother, Mrs. Charles
Philipia, decided that she was going to walk from New York City
to Miami, Florida. She reached Miami and, while there, was
interviewed by newspapermen. They wanted to know if the idea
of such a long journey on foot hadn't frightened her. How did she
ever summon courage to make such a journey with her feet as her
only mode of travel?
"It doesn't take courage to take one step," replied Mrs. Philipia.
"And that's all I did really. I just took one step. And then I took
another step. And then another and another and here I am."
Yes, you must take that first step. It makes no difference how
much thinking and study time you spend, it will avail you little
unless you also act.
One of the authors was introduced to a man in Phoenix, Arizona,
by a friend. It was a rather odd introduction.
"Meet the man who received a million dollars cash for a gold
mine and now has the million dollars and also owns the mine."
"How in the world did you manage such a thing?" came the
question, asked with considerable awe.



"Oh, I had an idea, but I didn't have any money. I did have a pick
and a shovel. So I took my pick and my shovel and went out to
make my idea a reality," he responded.
"And then it occurred to me if I would search for a gold mine
and dig around the vein, should I find a mine, one of the large
mining corporations could afford to work the mine whereas I
wouldn't have the necessary capital You know, mining machinery
costs money today.
"So I searched for and found a vein of gold. Every indication was
that I had made a very rich strike. I sold it for two million dollars.
The terms were a million dollars in cash and a first mortgage of a
million dollars. While mining operations were underway the vein
ran out I informed the owners of the mining company that if they
wanted to abandon the mine, I would take it back and cancel their
mortgage. They accepted. So you see, I got a million dollars cash
for the mine and still have the million dollars and the mine."
'( = A positive mental attitude will
attract wealth but a negative mental attitude will do just the
opposite.
With a positive mental attitude you will keep trying until you
achieve the wealth you are seeking. Now you might start with a
positive mental attitude and make your first step forward. Yet you
may become influenced by the negative side of your talisman and
stop when you are just one step from reaching your destination.
You may fail to employ one of the  success principles. Here's a
very good example
Let's call our man Oscar. In the latter part of , he was at the
railroad station in Oklahoma City where it was necessary for him
to wait several hours for a train connection east. He had spent
months in the western deserts in temperatures as high as 


degrees. He was seeking oil for an eastern concern. And he was
successful.
Oscar was a graduate of M.I.T. It is said that he had combined the
old divining rod, galvanometer, magnetometer, oscillograph,
radio tubes, and other instruments, into a Doodle Bug for
detecting oil deposits.
Now Oscar had received word that the company he represented
was insolvent. It had become bankrupt because the president had
used the firm's large cash resources in speculation in the stock
market. The market crashed in late . Oscar was on his way
home. He was out of a job, and the outlook was rather dismal.
The influence of NMA began to exert a powerful influence on
him.
Because he had to wait several hours, he decided to occupy
himself by setting up his instrument in the railroad station. The
reading on his instrument was so high in its positive indication of
oil deposits that Oscar in a rage impulsively kicked the
instrument and destroyed it.
You see, Oscar was frustrated.
"There couldn't be that much oil! There couldn't be that much
oil!" he shouted repeatedly in disgust.
But Oscar was frustrated. He was under the influence of a
negative mental attitude. The opportunity for which he had been
searching lay at his very feet. He only had to make one step to
reach it. But, because of the influence of NMA, he refused to
recognize it
He lost faith in his own invention. Had he been under the
influence of PMA, he would have attracted wealth, not repelled it


Applied faith is one of the important  success principles. The
test of your faith is whether you apply it at the time of your
greatest need.
NMA had led Oscar to believe that many of the things that he had
faith in were wrong. As you recall the Depression brought a fear
consciousness into the minds of many persons — Oscar was one.
He had worked hard and sacrificed, yet he was out of a job
through no fault of his own. The president of his company had
been held in high esteem by Oscar, yet this man whom he trusted
embezzled the company's funds. Now the machine that had
proved its value in the past seemed to have gone haywire. Yes —
Oscar was frustrated.
When Oscar boarded the train at the Oklahoma City railroad
station that day, he left his Doodle Bug behind. And he also left
one of the nation's richest oil deposits.
A short time later, Oklahoma City was found to be literally
floating on oil. Oscar has become a living demonstration of the
application of two principles
A positive mental attitude attracts wealth and a negative mental
attitude repels it.
%
But you may say
"All this about positive and negative mental attitudes is very fine
for someone who's out to make a million dollars. But I'm not
really interested in making a million.
"Of course, I want security. I want enough to live well and take
care of the needs I will have some day when I retire.
"What about me if I am an office employee? What about me
when I have just a fair salary?" Now here's our answer


You too can acquire wealth. Wealth enough for security. Or, even
wealth enough to become rich in spite of what you say. Just let
the PMA influence of your talisman affect you favorably.
We'll prove that this can be done.
And if for some reason you aren't fully convinced, just read a
book The Richest Man in Babylon. And then make your first step
forward. Keep going and you'll have the financial security or
wealth you are seeking. Now that's exactly what Mr. Osborn did.
Mr. Osborn was a salaried employee, yet he acquired wealth. It
wasn't so many years ago that he retired with the statement "I
now spend my time having my money make money for me while
I do what I want to do."
Again, the principle used by Mr. Osborn is so obvious that it is
often unseen.
The principle he learned and the one that you also can employ
will now be stated in a very few words. In reading The Richest
Man in Babylon, Mr. Osborn found that wealth could be acquired
if you
BCI
BC

!
!
!

BC
#

J

!


!

J

'

!
=

Let us repeat that's exactly what Mr. Osborn did. Just think of it.
You can have security or wealth by saving only a dime out of
each dollar you earn and investing it safely.



When should you start? Do It Now!
Now let's contrast Mr. Osborn's experience with that of a man
who had good physical health and read an inspirational book. He
was fifty years old when he was introduced to Napoleon Hill.
This man smiled when he said, "I read your book Think and
Grow Rich many years ago — but I'm not rich."
Napoleon Hill laughed and then replied seriously
"But you can be rich. Your future is ahead of you. You must
prepare yourself to be ready. And in making yourself ready for
the opportunities that are available to you, you must first develop
a positive mental attitude." And the interesting thing is that this
man did heed the author's advice. Five years later, the man wasn't
rich, but he had developed a positive mental attitude. And he was
on his way to wealth. He had been many thousands of dollars in
debt. Within the five-year period, he had gotten completely out of
debt and had begun making investments with the money he had
saved.
He developed PMA as he studied the book Think and Grow Rich.
He did not only read it. He had learned to recognize principles
and apply them.
When the NMA side of his talisman was influencing him, he was
like those workmen who blame their tools for poor
craftsmanship.
Have you ever blamed your tools?
Where does the fault lie If you own a perfect camera and use the
right film; if you have the proper set of rules to take perfect
pictures under all types of circumstances; if someone else takes
perfect photographs with your camera but — yours are failures?


Does the fault lie with the camera?
Could it be that you have read the rules but haven't taken the time
to understand them? Or, if you do understand them, that you don't
apply the rules?
Could it be that you will read Success Through a Positive Mental
Attitude — a book that could change the entire course of your life
for the better—without taking the time to understand, memorize
self-motivators, learn the principles that will guarantee success —
and apply them? Your answer will be evident to you by your
action.
Now, it's not too late to learn.
If you haven't learned by now, you might as well learn now you
will not succeed consistently unless you know and understand the
rules; you will not continuously succeed unless you apply the
rules. Therefore, take the time to understand and apply what you
are reading in this book. PMA will help you.
!
! Remember, the thoughts that you
think and the statements you make regarding yourself determine
your mental attitude. If you have a worthwhile objective, find the
one reason why you can achieve it rather than hundreds of
reasons why you can't.
One of the rules in obtaining what you want through PMA is to
act once you have your sights on a goal. Another is "Go the extra
mile." W. Clement Stone tells of the following experience which
illustrates both rules.

$
B)

#
/ #
%
 
!
I
!



!!
.

'

 / #
=C

#
=

,/


'

'

&

#
! '

/!

/

# 
' '
%
   

 



!


#

' ##

#
'

!

*




% 

&

J

'J



$ #

=

)
/
# D ' # #
!

#
J

/



!

'

/ #

#
!
#
!!

#
!

$

#

#



=

#

&

/

!

!%
'
'!
#

#

#
=/

# E<
<<<
!
!

=

=
#

!
! 

?
#

.

*M<<
'= /

/

)

# ,
/ '

=



!
#

=

 
=

#


,
'

#
=



!

I


'

/

#



/#

'



!

'

!

I

/ ?

.

# #
'
!
#
!


#
#

;

!
!
= B


'



'

!

! (!
# !!
!


!
# !!

 -

!

'

#

/
' =C

' #
/

=/
I
! =

!
!

.

,/

'

#

=
#

!
!

= )
! '

/

=
!

!

! = !
# #
=
=
# '=  '
'

!

#
=

Now this wasn't so surprising after all. It's quite common for a
family to buy a duplex apartment and rent one and live in the
other. What is surprising to a person without experience is how
easy it is to get what you want by understanding and applying the
success principles to be found in an autobiography or selfimprovement book.



"Attract wealth with PMA," we say. You say "Money makes
money and I have no money." This is a negative mental attitude.
If you don't have money, use OPM. That's what the next chapter
is all about.
-. '. /

. If you know your specific destination and take the first step,
you're on your way!
. The test of your faith is whether you apply it when you are not
in difficulty, as well as at the time of your greatest need.
. If you don't succeed when you finally read and study Success
Through a Positive Mental Attitude, with whom does the fault
lie?
. The house of your dreams You can have it! Like Frank and
Claudia Noonan, you may buy two houses and rent one to pay
for both.
. Do you need to be in an accident or get sick and land in a
hospital to establish the habit of regularly engaging in study,
thinking and planning time regarding your personal, family or
business life?
. Have you made a start toward achieving desirable goals by (a)
writing down each goal, (b) setting deadlines for reaching
them, (c) setting high goals, and (d) inspecting your written
statements daily?
. Where will you be and what will you be doing ten years from
today if you keep on doing what you are doing now?


. The Richest Man in Babylon This book gives you a proven
formula of success
BCI
BC

!

=

!


!

BC 

 '

BC /

!
# '



!

=
!

B !

C

*<
ENGAGE IN
STUDY...
THINKING...
AND PLANNING TIME WITH PMA!



=

=

CHAPTER 
If You Don't Have MoneyUse OPM!
Business? It is quite simple. It is other people's money!" said
Alexander Dumas the Younger in his play, The Question of
Money.
Yes, it's that simple use OPM — other people's money. That's
the way to acquire great wealth. Benjamin Franklin did it,
William Nickerson did it, Conrad Hilton did it, Henry J. Kaiser
did it, Colonel Sanders did it, and Ray Kroc did it. And if you are
wealthy, the chances are you did it too.
Now, if you are not wealthy, learn to read what is unwritten. In
fact — rich or poor read what is unwritten into every platitude,
axiom, or self-motivator. The basic unwritten premise in "Use
OPM" is that you will operate on the highest ethical standards of
integrity, honor, honesty, loyalty, consent, and the Golden Rule
and apply these in your business relationships.
The dishonest man is not entitled to credit.
And the self-motivator Use OPM implies repayment in full as
agreed with an advantageous consideration or profit to those
whose money is used.
Credit and the use of OPM are one and the same thing. It is the
lack of a satisfactory credit system within country that keeps
backward nations back. Whereas it is the credit system as
practiced in the United States that has developed such great
wealth and progress in this nation. It has been singularly
American.



Now the person, corporation or nation that does not have credit
— or does not use it for expansion and progress if they do have it
— is missing an important number in the combination for
success. Therefore take the advice of a wise and successful
businessman like Benjamin Franklin.
#
Advice To a Young Tradesman written in  by
Franklin, discusses the use of OPM as follows
"Remember, that money is of the prolific, generating nature.
Money can beget money, and its offspring can beget more," and
so on.
Also, Franklin said
"Remember, that six pounds a year is but a groat a day. For this
little sum (which may be daily wasted either in time or expense
unperceived) a man of credit may, on his own security, have the
constant possession and use of an hundred pounds."
Now this statement of Franklin's is a symbol of an idea. His
advice is as good today as when it was written. You can start with
a few cents and have constant pos-session of $ by employing
it. Or you can expand the idea and have constant possession of
millions of dollars. That is what Conrad Hilton does. He is a man
of credit.
The Hilton Hotels Corporation obtained credit of millions of
dollars to build luxurious motels for air travelers at large airports.
The corporation's collateral mostly, Hilton's name for honest
dealing.
Honesty is one thing for which a satisfactory substitute has never
been found. It is something which reaches deeper into a human
being than most traits of personality. Honesty, or the lack of it,


writes itself indelibly into every word one speaks, into every
thought and deed, and often reflects itself in one's face so that the
most casual observer can sense the quality of sincerity
immediately. The dishonest person, on the other hand, may
announce his weakness in the very tone of his voice, the
expression on his face, in the nature and trend of his
conversations, or in the type of service he renders.
So while this chapter might seem to be one about the use of other
people's money, it also has strong overtones about character in it.
Honesty and reputation, credit and success in business are all
intermixed. The man who has the first of them is well on his way
to gaining the other three.
( +
. ( William Nickerson was another
man of credit and reputation who found "Money can beget
money, and its offspring can beget more," and so on. He tells
about it in his book. The title tells what he did. The book tells
how he did it.
Nickerson's book is aimed specifically at how to make money
with OPM in your spare time in the real estate field. But almost
everything he has to say also applies to you in your efforts to
acquire wealth by making investments with OPM.
How I Turned $ Into $ Million in My Spare Time is the title
of the book.
"Show me a millionaire," he says, "and I will show you almost
invariably a heavy borrower." To back up his statement, he points
to wealthy men such as Henry Kaiser, Henry Ford, and Walt
Disney.
And we will point to Charlie Sammons who, with bank credit,
developed a forty million dollar business in ten years. But, before


we do, let's talk about the people who help men like Conrad
Hilton, William Nickerson, and Charlie Sammons by loaning
them the money they need.

+
Banks are in business to loan
money. The more they loan to honest men, the more money they
make for themselves. Commercial banks loan money primarily
for business purposes. Thus loans for luxuries are not
encouraged.
Your banker is an expert. And more important, he is your friend.
He wants to help you. For he is one of the people eager to see you
succeed. If the banker knows his business, listen to what he has to
say.
For a person with common sense never underestimates the power
of a borrowed dollar or the advice of an expert. It was the use of
OPM and a successful plan — plus the PMA success principles
of initiative, courage, and common sense — that resulted in an
average American boy named Charlie Sammons becoming
wealthy.
Like some Texans, Charlie Sammons of Dallas is a millionaire.
In fact, like some other Texans, he is a multimillionaire. Yet at
the age of , he was no better off financially than most teenage
boys except that he had worked and saved some money.
One of the officers in the bank where Charlie regularly deposited
his savings each Saturday took an interest in him. For the banker
felt now here's a boy of character and ability — and he knows
the value of money.
So when Charlie decided to go in business for himself, buying
and selling cotton, the banker gave him credit. And this was the
first experience Charlie Sammons had in the use of OPM. As you


will see, it was not the last. He learned then, and has seen it
confirmed since
Your banker is your friend.
About a year and a half after he became a cotton broker, the
young man became a horse and mule trader. It was then that he
learned much about human nature.
And his understanding of people in addition to his knowledge of
money soon developed in Charlie Sammons a very sound
philosophy of a brand commonly observed in persons who are, or
will be, successful. Charlie learned this philosophy at an early
age. He has never lost it. Today he still maintains it.
This brand of philosophy is known as common sense.
After he had operated a few years as a horse and mule trader, two
men came to Charlie and asked him to go to work for them.
These two men had developed a reputation for themselves as
being outstandingly successful in the sale of insurance. They had
come to Charlie because they had learned a lesson from defeat
Here's how it happened…
It seems that after these two salesmen had successfully sold life
insurance over a period of many years, they were motivated to
form a company of their own. They were good salesmen all right.
But they were poor business administrators. In fact, they were
such good salesmen that they sold their company out of business.
Now it is not uncommon for salesmen to assume that financial
success in a business is contingent only on sales. But this is a
false premise. A poor administration can lose money as fast, or
faster, than a good sales management and sales force can bring it



in. Their trouble was that neither one of these men was a good
administrator.
But they had learned their lesson — the hard way. On the day
they went to see Charlie, one of the salesmen told their story of
defeat and said
"Since our company went broke, we have paid off our losses
from the commissions we have since made selling insurance. We
also had to pay for our living. It has taken a mighty long time but
— we have done it.
"We know we are good salesmen. And we also know now that we
should keep to our own specialty — selling." He hesitated,
looked into the eyes of the young man and continued
"Charlie, you have your feet on the ground. You have good
common horse sense and we need you. Together we can
succeed."
And they did.
. (
BC@@@@@@@
A few years
later Charlie Sammons bought all of the shares of the company he
and these two men had formed. How did he get the money? He
used OPM plus what he had saved. Where did he get the large
amount of money that he needed? He borrowed it from a bank, of
course. Remember he had learned early that his banker was his
friend.
And then in the year that his company had produced an annual
premium volume of almost $,, the insurance executive
finally found the success formula for rapid expansion that he had
long been looking for.
He was ready.


It was this formula plus OPM that developed a forty million
dollar premium volume in a single year. Sammons had seen that
an insurance company in Chicago had successfully developed a
sales plan through "leads."
Now for many years sales managers had used what is termed the
"lead system" to promote a new business. And with sufficient
good leads salesmen often earn exceedingly large incomes.
Inquiries from individuals who indicate an interest are called
"leads." These are generally obtained from some form of
promotional advertising program.
Perhaps you know from experience that with human nature being
what it is, many salesmen are timid or afraid to try to sell persons
whom they don't know or with whom they have had no previous
personal contact or communication. Because of this fear, they
waste a lot of time that could be used in selling prospects.
But even an ordinary salesman will be motivated to call on as
many prospects as he has leads. For he knows that many sales can
be made even though he himself may have little sales training or
experience — when he is furnished good leads. And besides he
has an address and a specific person to see there. He believes the
prospect is somewhat interested before he interviews him.
Therefore he is not as fearful as he would be if he were forced to
try to sell a person without any preconditioning whatsoever.
Some companies build their entire sales program on such leads.
And advertising is used to obtain them.
But advertising costs money.
Charlie Sammons knew where to go to get the money when he
had a good bankable idea — the Republic National Bank of
Dallas. For it is well known in Texas that this bank helped build


Texas. And it is in the business to loan money to men of integrity
like Charlie Sammons who have a plan and know how to work it.
Now while it is true that some bankers won't take the time to
learn their client's business, Oran Kite and other officers of the
Republic National do. Charlie explained his plan to them. And, as
a result, he was able to employ unlimited credit to build his
insurance business through the lead system.
You see, it was because of the American credit system that
Charlie Sammons was able to build the Reserve Life Insurance
Company. And under such a system he was able to develop a
premium volume from four hundred thousand dollars to over
forty million within the short space of ten years. Again because
he used OPM in his investments, he is able to invest and own
controlling interest in hotels, office buildings, manufacturing
plants and other enterprises.
But you don't need to go to Texas to use OPM. W. Clement Stone
bought an insurance company with one million six hundred
thousand dollars in assets, using the seller's own money. He went
to Baltimore.
&



B/>@@@@@
This is how he describes the purchase

*
/ #
#
#

(
! = /
#



/#
!

! ! ?
#

!


?
!

=/
!
E*

D&

$ # / ' # #
/ #
! = /
' #
!
 /


' 
#
#
=

#
#/
/

=) #
# =)

/ !

/

!
D B*C

BAC
=/

'

!

#
=I




#
!#
=
#
!
!
# '
!
J
!
J
#
)
!

!

!
=

!

=
/

(#

/#
!


/

D
#

!
=

#

#

=/

=

/
/

=/


/!

D/

=

'

&

=




#

%
?



!!
!
#

/

#

!
/

#

!#
I
!

/#

/

#
#
 #

=


#

! #
! = B$ #
#
! !
!

?

#
=


=
!

/
#

$
'

"
!

/ #
'
=C

/

/

/!
' ##

!

#

' # #
/ #
# !
'
=

#
#

/

! / !
!
/
=/

!

)

#

#

?

#

/
=

!

=

= )# =
=

!



/
!

#

=

)

!
!

/

!

!

'
!

!

'#
 '
=



!
! /

#
'

'

/#

!

?
!

=
I
!

# !
' ##
!
!
#
!
=

/
!
/ ' # /
!


!

=)
=

# =

=)
!

/

/

#
#
'

# /
&

=
$ # #

!
!

'= )

=/#

! /#
!
#= /
  != )

/ #

D "
#

=)
'
I

=


'

= I

D
/
 !!
!
# .

.
 !!
 !!

#

.

!

= 


&

' #
 !
#
!
' #  !!
#
!
 ! =


= )
)


!
#

=)
!

= "=


(

!
!=


#

/

'

I

# !  '


#

#
#!

#

!

=
! !

!
'
#

 !!
!


?

!

!

/

=
/
!
!

' #% =
/
!

!
#
=

#
=

#

(


  * '
#

/

'
! 
= /

= "=
% =

! /
#

#

!

!

!

!
!

/#

?
!
A =!=

#
A =!=
! # % =
.

.

/

!

!

% =
 !

'=)
=
!

!



/

=
!

!
=  ! '

/

!

=@


!

!

/
'

!

=


/



!

EM
 !!
?
'
AM
<<< ! !


!
=/

= /


!

#

= /
=

$ #

!

*
><<
<<<
=" #
/
,/
.%= /

/ #
 !!

!
=/# ?
!
=

!
#



/

# D

!!

#

D

!
D &
/ # #


!


!

!
! ' =

,% =

/ !

D


!

=



!

=

#
!

! ,/



#

=
!
!
! #
/

#
#

#

=

% =

!

'

!

D " #

,

/#

=%

# D /#

=
-

/

!

!
!

.



EM

!

=



#

!

#

!

!

#

#



!
#

#

!  /
.

/

!

=

-

/' #

!

#

!
!

!
=

!

!
!
!

!
/

#

!

!

.


/

# 

/#
.

#


'

!
!

!
=

' ! D
!

#
!




% =
!



=
#

)

#

D )
!
!

'#

=
#
.

= /
/

!
/

MD<< =!=

,

 !!
#



=

Now this experience is related in detail here to illustrate the steps
one takes to achieve his aims through the use of OPM. If you will
refer to  Eleven entitled "Is There a Short Cut to Riches?"
you will see how the principles mentioned there were applied
here.



While this story indicates how the use of OPM can help a person,
credit can sometimes be harmful.
"
So far we have been talking
about the benefits of the use of credit. We have been talking
about the practice of borrowing money for the purpose of making
money. This is capitalism. This is good.
But that which is good can be harmful to a person with a negative
mental attitude. Credit is no exception. And credit may make a
person who has been honest become dishonest. The abuse of
credit is one of the main sources of worry, frustration,
unhappiness, and dishonesty.
Now we are talking about credit given voluntarily by a creditor.
He gives credit to a person who he thinks has the quality of being
worthy, on whose truthfulness he can rely. The one who betrays
such a trust is dishonest. Such a person is the one who will
borrow money or purchase merchandise without the intent to
make the payments agreed upon or to pay the loan in full.
Likewise, the honest person can become dishonest when he
neglects to repay the loans he makes, or pay for the merchandise
he buys, even though circumstances may prevent him from
making a payment on the due date.
For the man under the influence of the PMA side of his talisman
will have the courage to face the truth. He will have the courage
to notify his creditors as far in advance as possible when
circumstances prevent him from making a payment. And then he
will work out some satisfactory arrangement by mutual consent
with his creditor. Above everything else, he will sacrifice until
his obligation is finally fully paid.



The honest man with common sense does not abuse credit
privileges.
The honest man who lacks common sense will borrow or
purchase on credit indiscriminately. And then because he sees no
way to pay his creditors, the NMA influence of his talisman
exerts such a terrific force on him that he may become dishonest.
He may feel his situation is hopeless and he can do nothing about
it. He realizes that he won't be thrown into jail for owing
borrowed money. Although he thinks he is not going to be
punished, in reality his worries, fears, and frustrations are a very
real punishment.
And he remains dishonest until he comes under the strong
influences of the PMA side of his talisman — influences strong
enough to cause him to clear his obligations in full.
The abuse of credit privileges has literally brought on physical,
mental, and moral illness. Remember Necessity, NMA, and Crime
in  Three entitled "Clear the Cobwebs From Your
Thinking."
". (
As a very young salesman in the
early part of , W. Clement Stone called on an officer at the
Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Company in
Chicago. The banker was talking to a customer or friend. While
the young salesman was waiting, he overheard him say, "The
market just can't keep going up forever. I'm selling my shares."
Some of the keenest investors in the country lost fortunes when
the stock market crashed the following year — all because they
lacked the knowledge of cycles, or, if they had the knowledge,
they, unlike the banker, failed to act.



Tens of thousands of individuals engaging in all forms of
business enterprises, including farming, lost their wealth — even
though they were honest, prudent persons. Their wealth was
acquired through OPM. As their securities increased in value,
they borrowed more money to purchase more securities, farmland
or other assets.
When the market value of their securities fell, they were unable to
pay when the banks were forced to call in their loans.
Cycles repeat with regularity. So, in the first half of the s,
thousands of honest, prudent persons again lost their wealth
because they didn't clear their loans in time by selling a portion of
their securities — or didn't refrain from going further into debt to
make additional purchases. When you use OPM, be certain to
calculate how you can and will pay the individual or institution
that loaned you the money.
Important If you have lost a portion or all of your wealth,
remember that cycles repeat. Don't hesitate to start over again at
the proper time. Many wealthy persons today lost fortunes
previously. But because they didn't lose their PMA, they had the
courage to learn from their experiences and, subsequently,
acquired even greater wealth.
If you would like to learn more about cycles, refer to Cycles —
The Mysterious Forces That Trigger Events, by Edward R.
Dewey and Og Mandino. You may find it exceedingly profitable.
You can keep abreast of the theories and experiments on cycles
by subscribing to Cycles magazine (write to  S. Highland
Ave., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.)
In business, there are very few numbers necessary in the
combination to success, but if one or more of the numbers are
missing, you will fail until you find the missing numbers.


The use of other people's money has been the means whereby
honest men who were poor became rich. Money or credit is an
important number in the combination to business success.
A young sales manager, whose yearly
earnings are in excess of $,, wrote
"I have a feeling the type of feeling one would have if he were
standing in front of a safe which held all the wealth, happiness,
and success in the world, and he had all the numbers to the
combination — except one. Just one number! If he had it, he
could open the door."
Often the difference between poverty and wealth lies in the
employment of all principles in a formula but one. Just that one
missing number makes the difference!
This can be illustrated in the experience of another man who had
been successful in selling cosmetics for a manufacturer before he
went into business for himself.
In his own business Leonard Lavin, like any man who starts from
the bottom, was faced with problems. As you will see later, that
was good. It was good because he had to study, think, plan, and
work hard before he found a solution to each problem.
Bernice, his wife, and he formed a perfect mastermind alliance.
And they worked together in perfect harmony. They
manufactured one cosmetic item and acted as distributors for
other companies. But they lacked working capital so they were
forced to do the work themselves.
As their business grew, Bernice became an expert in office
management and purchasing, and an excellent administrator.
Leonard became a successful sales manager and efficient
production manager. And when the business grew, they were


wise enough to employ the services of a lawyer with good
common sense — the kind that gets things done. And they also
benefited from the services of an expert in accounting and taxes.
The way to make a fortune is to manufacture or sell a product or
service (preferably a necessity at a low cost) that repeats. They
did both.
Every dollar that could be spared was plowed back into the
business. Necessity motivated them to study, think, and plan;
make one dollar do the part of many; obtain maximum results
from every working hour; eliminate waste.
Month by month their sales moved forward as Leonard
aggressively sought to break each previous sales record. He
became known in the industry as a man who knew his business.
To many, he became known as a man who learned to go the extra
mile.
Going the extra mile in two instances completely changed the
course of his career for the better.
In the one instance his banker introduced him to three of the
bank's clients who had made an investment in another cosmetic
company. They needed expert advice from someone with good
common sense. And Leonard took the time to help them.
Leonard went the extra mile in doing a good turn for a buyer in a
drug store in Los Angeles. And then one day the buyer showed
his appreciation by confidentially informing Leonard that the firm
manufacturing VO-, a quality hair dressing, might be for sale.
Leonard got excited. For here was a -year-old company with a
quality product that had leveled off. He knew, from his cosmetic
experience and from the study of cycles and trends, that all this
company needed was new life, new blood, new activity.


He acted on the self-starter Do It Now! In fact that very evening
he was in conference with the owner. Now ordinarily in a
transaction of this type, where the buyer and seller don't know
each other, it takes weeks and sometimes months to negotiate —
before there is a meeting of the minds. A pleasing personality and
good common sense on the part of the buyer or seller often
eliminate unnecessary delays. Because of Leonard's pleasing personality and his good common sense, the owner agreed to sell the
company for $, that same night.
Now it is true that Leonard had been doing well but it was also
true that every dollar he could spare was being plowed back into
his business. Where could he get $,?
In his hotel room that night he realized that he had all of the
combinations to real wealth but one. Just one — money.
The next morning, as he awakened, he had a flash of inspiration.
Again he reacted to the self-starter Do It Now! For he made a
long distance telephone call to one of the three men to whom he
was introduced by his banker. He had helped them and perhaps
they could give him the right advice. For they knew more about
financing than he. Because they had invested in another cosmetic
company, perhaps they would invest in his. They did.
And because these men were experienced in investing, they
employed a successful investment formula which made it
necessary for Leonard to agree to (a) Consolidate all his
operations; (b) devote his entire efforts to one corporation; (c)
have the corporation pay back the loan on quarterly installments
over a five-year period; (d) pay at the going rate of interest on
the loan; and (e) give % of the corporation's stock as a
premium for the investment gamble.



Leonard did agree. He saw the value of the use of OPM. The
three men used OPM, too. They borrowed the $, from
their banks.
The missing number — now Leonard and Bernice had it! They
worked long hours. They put then hearts into the business. They
found it a thrilling game.
It wasn't long before VO- was being used in every part of the
United States and in many foreign countries.
December is usually the slowest month of the year for the
cosmetic manufacturer. But in December, a year and a half after
Leonard and Bernice took over the management of VO- and
another product which was acquired — Rinse Away — the
factory had a dollar volume of more than $,. That was as
much as VO- and Rinse Away together had received during their
past years under previous management.
And Bernice and Leonard found the missing number. With it they
found the combination to acquire wealth. For it was only three
years after the acquisition of VO- that their equities in their
company were valued in excess of a million dollars.
Now the numbers in Leonard Lavin's combination for success
were
$ = *D
$ = AD

=
!

! ' !
!  #

$ = ED

#
=
!

#

!

! !



#


$ = ;D

!
B

!
!

!
!
$ = MD

C
'

=

!

#

$ = >D

.% =

#
!

$ = +D

#

#=

#

#

!!

.%

#

=
$ = GD

# '
! =

You, too, can use OPM for "Business? It is quite simple. It is
other people's money."
Now if you choose to learn the principles in this chapter as well
as those in  Twelve entitled "Attract — Don't Repel —
Wealth," you, like Leonard and Bernice Lavin, can find the
missing numbers to unlock the door to riches for yourself.
But to be healthy and happy, you must find satisfaction in your
job. When you read the next chapter, you will learn how.
-. '. /

. "Business? It is quite simple. It is other people's money!"
. OPM other people's money is the way to acquire wealth.



. The basic unwritten premise in "Use OPM" is operate on the
highest ethical standards of integrity, honor, honesty, loyalty,
consent, and the Golden Rule.
. The dishonest man is not entitled to credit.
. Your banker is your friend.
. Where there is nothing to lose by trying, and a great deal to
gain if successful, by all means try!
. When you want to make a deal with someone, develop a plan
that will give him what he wants, and in doing so get what you
want. A good deal is mutually advantageous.
. Credit used indiscriminately can hurt you. Abuse of credit is
the cause of much frustration, misery and dishonesty.
. To unlock the combination to success, you must know all the
necessary numbers. Just one missing number may keep you
from achieving your goal.
. You too can find the missing numbers and unlock the door to
riches for yourself.
. Learn about cycles in order to know when to expand, and
when to make and pay off loans.
HAVE THE COURAGE
TO
FACE THE TRUTH!



CHAPTER 
How to Find Satisfaction
in Your Job
No matter what your job may be — boss or employee; plant
manager or factory worker; doctor or nurse; lawyer or secretary;
teacher or student; housewife or maid — you owe it to yourself to
find satisfaction in your job as long as you have it.
You can, you know. Satisfaction is a mental attitude. Your own
mental attitude is the one thing you possess over which you alone
have complete control. You can determine to find satisfaction in
your job, and discover the way to do so.
You are more apt to find satisfaction in your job if you do "what
comes naturally" — that for which you have a natural aptitude or
liking. When you take a job that doesn't "come naturally" you
may experience mental and emotional conflicts and frustrations.
You can, however, neutralize and eventually overcome such
conflicts and frustrations — if you use PMA, and if you are
motivated to gain experience to become proficient in the job.
Jerry Asam has PMA. And Jerry Asam loves his work. He finds
satisfaction in his job.
Who is Jerry Asam? What does he do?
Jerry is a descendant of the Hawaiian kings. The job he loves so
much is that of sales manager for the Hawaiian office of a large
organization.
Jerry loves his work because he knows his work well and is very
proficient in it. Thus, he is doing what comes naturally. But even
so, Jerry has days when things could be a little rosier. In sales


work, days like this can be disturbing — if one does not study,
think, and plan to correct difficulties and to maintain a positive
mental attitude. So Jerry reads inspirational, self-help action
books.
Jerry had read such inspirational books and learned three very
important lessons
*= !

!

(

=

A= /



!


=



#

#
!

.% =
E= )



' #

#

!= /
' 



! #

=
Jerry believed these lessons. He got into action. He tried them out
himself. He studied his company's sales manuals, and practiced
what he learned in actual selling, He set his goals — high goals
— and achieved them. And each morning he said to himself "I
feel healthy! I feel happy! I feel terrific!" And he did feel healthy,
happy, and terrific. And his sales results were terrific too!
When Jerry was sure he himself was proficient in his sales work,
he gathered about himself a group of sales- men and taught them
the lessons he had learned. He trained the men in the latest and
best selling methods as set forth in his company's training
manuals. He took them out personally and demonstrated how
easy it is to sell if one uses the right methods, has a plan, and
approaches each day with a positive mental attitude. He taught
them to set high sales goals and to achieve them with PMA.


Every morning Jerry's group meets and recites enthusiastically, in
unison "I feel healthy! I feel happy! I feel terrific!" Then they
laugh together, slap one another on the back for good luck, and
each one goes his way to sell his quota for the day. Each man sets
a goal and he sets it so high that older, more experienced
salesmen and sales managers on the mainland are amazed.
At the end of each week every salesman turns in a sales report
that makes the president and sales manager of Jerry's organization
smile big, broad smiles.
Are Jerry and the men under him happy and satisfied in their
jobs? You bet they are! And here are some of the reasons they are
happy
*= )

# '# J
#
!

#

' #
!
!=

A= )

#
!= )

E= )
!
;= )

#

' #
 !

'

#
!

!

! '

!
#

.% =

!

(

=
?

!

#

? #

=

!
;
;
;! Another young
salesman in the same organization on the mainland learned to
control his mental attitude through the use of Jerry Asam's selfmotivator. He was an eighteen-year-old college student who was
working during his summer vacation selling insurance on a coldcanvass basis in stores and offices. Some of the things he had
learned during his two-week theoretical training period were



*= )

!

#
#

# # '
#

!

=
A=
E=

'
!

=

=

;= /

! !
'


'

(!

D 

' !
=

After he had a few weeks' selling experience, he set a specific
target of achievement. He aimed to win an award. To qualify, it
was necessary to make a minimum of one hundred sales in a
single week.
By Friday night of that week, he had succeeded in making eighty
sales — twenty short of his target. The young salesman was
determined that nothing would stop him from achieving his
objective. He believed what he had been taught What the mind of
man can conceive and believe, the mind of man can achieve with
PMA. Although the other salesmen in his group closed their
week's work on Friday night, he was back on the job early
Saturday morning.
By three o'clock in the afternoon, he hadn't made a sale. He had
been taught that sales are contingent upon the attitude of the
salesman — not the prospect.
He remembered the Jerry Asam self-motivator and repeated it
five times with enthusiasm. I feel healthy! I feel happy! I feel
terrific!
About five o'clock that afternoon he had made three sales. He
was only seventeen from his goal. He remembered that Success is



achieved by those who try and maintained by those who keep
trying with PMA! Again he repeated several times with
enthusiasm, I feel healthy! I feel happy! I feel terrific! About
eleven o'clock that night — he was tired, but he was happy! He
had made his twentieth sale for the day! He had hit his target! He
had won the award and learned that failure can be turned into
success by — keeping on trying.
(
+
So it was mental attitude
that motivated Jerry Asam and the salesmen under him to find
satisfaction in their jobs. It was a controlled positive mental
attitude which helped the young student earn the reward and
satisfaction he sought.
Just look about you. Notice those people who enjoy their work
and those who don't. What's the difference between them? Happy,
satisfied persons control their mental attitude. They take a
positive view of their situation. They look for the good, and when
something isn't so good, they look first to themselves to see if
they can improve it. They try to learn more about their work so
that they can become more proficient and make their work more
satisfying to themselves and their employer.
But those who are unhappy clutch their NMA tightly. Indeed, it is
almost as if they want to be unhappy. They look for everything
about which they can complain the hours are too long; lunch
hours are too short; the boss is too crabby; the company doesn't
give enough holidays or the right kind of bonuses. Or maybe they
even complain about irrelevant things, such as Susie wears the
same dress every day; John the bookkeeper doesn't write legibly,
and so on, and so on. Anything — just so they can be unhappy.
And they succeed very well, too. They are decidedly unhappy
people — on the job and generally elsewhere too. NMA
possesses them entirely.



And this is true regardless of the type of work involved. If you
want to be happy and satisfied, you can be you will control your
mental attitude and reverse your talisman from NMA to PMA;
you will look for ways and means to create happiness.
If you can bring happiness and enthusiasm into your work
situation, you'll be making a contribution that few others could
equal. You will make your work fun and your job satisfaction
will be measured in smiles — and in productivity, too.
In one of our classes, we
were talking about this principle of bringing enthusiasm into
one's job, when a young lady in the rear of the classroom raised
her hand. She got to her feet and said
"I've come here with my husband. What you say may be all right
for a man in business, but it's no good for a housewife. You men
have new and interesting challenges every day. But it's not like
that with housework. The trouble with housework is... it's just too
darned daily."
This seemed like a real challenge to us there are a lot of people
who have jobs that are "just too darned daily." If we could find
some way to help this young lady, perhaps we could help others
who thought their work was routine. We asked her what made her
housework seem so "daily," and it turned out that she had no
sooner finished making the beds when they were dirtied again,
washing the dishes when they were soiled again, cleaning the
floors when they were muddied again. "You just get these things
done so they can get undone," she said.
"It does seem frustrating," the instructor agreed. "Are there any
women who do enjoy housework?"
"Well, yes, I guess there are," she said.


"What do they find in housework to interest them and keep them
enthusiastic?"
After a moment's thought the young woman replied, "Maybe it's
their attitude. They don't seem to think their work is confining;
they seem to see something beyond the routine."
This was the crux of the problem. One of the secrets of job
satisfaction is being able to "see beyond the routine." It is
knowing that your work is leading somewhere. This is true
whether you are a housewife or a file clerk, a gasoline pump
operator or the president of a large corporation. You'll find
satisfaction in routine chores only when you see them as stepping
stones. Each chore I a stone, leading in a direction that you
choose.

,
The answer, then, for this young
housewife, was to find some goal which she really wanted to
achieve, and to find a way to make her routine daily housework
lead to the attainment of that goal. She volunteered the
information that she had always wanted to take her family on a
trip around the world.
"All right," the instructor said. "We'll settle on that Now, set
yourself a time limit. When do you want to go?"
"When the baby is twelve years old," she said. "That will be six
years from now."
"Now, let's see. This will take a little doing. You will need
money, for one thing. Your husband will have to be able to take
off for a year. You will have to plan an itinerary. You will want
to study up on the countries you will be visiting. Do you suppose
you can find a way to let bed-making, dish-washing, floor-



scrubbing, and meal-planning be stepping stones toward your
goal?"
A few months later the lady in this story came to see us. It was
apparent the minute she walked into the room that here was a
woman who had succeeded proudly.
"It's amazing," she told us, "how well this stepping-stone idea has
worked! I haven't found a single chore that doesn't fit in. I use my
cleaning time as a thinking and planning time. Shopping time is a
wonderful time to expand our horizons I deliberately buy foods
from other countries foods that we will be eating on our trip.
And I use the meal time as a teaching time. If we are having
Chinese egg noodles, I read all I can find about China and its
people, and then at dinner I tell the family all about them.

"Not one of my duties is dull or uninteresting to me anymore.
And I know they never will be again, thanks to the step-stone
theory!"
So no matter how humdrum or tiresome your job may be, if at the
end of it you see a goal that you desire, that job can bring
satisfaction to you. This is a situation which confronts many
persons in all walks of life. One young man may want to be a
doctor, but he has to work his way through school. The job he
takes will be decided by many factors, such as hours, location,
rate of pay, and so on. Aptitude will have little to do with it. A
very intelligent, ambitious, young man may end up behind a soda
fountain, washing cars, or digging ditches. Certainly the job
offers him no challenge or stimulation. It is merely a means to an
end. Yet because he knows he is going where he wants to go, to
him whatever strains the job may impose on him are worth the
end result.



Sometimes, however, the price to be paid on a given job is too
high in relation to the goal which it will purchase. And if such a
job should happen to be yours, change your job. For if you are
unhappy at your job, the poisons of this dissatisfaction spread
into every phase of living.
If, however, the job is worth the price but you are still unhappy,
develop inspirational dissatisfaction. Dissatisfaction can be
positive or negative, good or bad, depending upon the
circumstances. Remember A positive mental attitude is the right
mental attitude in a given situation.
)
;Charles Becker, former
president of Franklin Life Insurance Company, says "I would
urge that you be dissatisfied. Not dissatisfied in the sense of
disgruntlement, but dissatisfied in the sense of that 'divine
discontent' which throughout the history of the world has
produced all real progress and reform. I hope you will never be
satisfied. I hope you will constantly feel the urge to improve and
perfect not only yourself, but the world around you."
Inspirational dissatisfaction can motivate persons from sinner to
saint, failure to success, poverty to riches, defeat to victory, and
misery to happiness.
What do you do when you make a mistake? when things go
wrong? when misunderstandings develop with others? when you
meet defeat? when everything seems black? when it appears that
there is no way to turn? when it looks as if a satisfactory solution
to your problem is impossible?
Do you Do nothing and allow disaster to overtake you? Do you
fold up? Become frightened? Run away?



Or, do you develop inspirational dissatisfaction? Do you turn
disadvantages into advantages? Do you determine what you
want? Do you apply faith, clear thinking, and positive action,
knowing that desirable results can and will be achieved?
Napoleon Hill says every adversity has the seed of an equivalent
benefit. Isn't it true that in the past what seemed to be a great
difficulty or an unfortunate experience has inspired you to
success and happiness that might not otherwise have been
achieved?

Albert Einstein was dissatisfied because Newton's laws didn't
answer all his questions. So he kept inquiring into nature and
higher mathematics until he came up with the theory of relativity
… And from that theory the world has developed the method of
breaking the atom, learned the secret of transmuting energy into
matter and vice versa, and dared and succeeded to conquer space
— and all sorts of amazing things we very likely would not have
accomplished if Einstein had not developed inspirational
dissatisfaction.
Now, of course, we are not all Einsteins, and what results from
our inspirational dissatisfaction may not change the world. But it
can change our world and we can move forward in the direction
we want to go. Let us tell you what happened to Clarence Lantzer
when he became dissatisfied with his job.
 Now Clarence Lantzer had been a streetcar
conductor in Canton, Ohio, for years. And one day he woke up in
the morning and decided that he didn't like his job. It was too
muck the same. He was sick and tired of it. The more Clarence
thought about the matter, the more dissatisfied he became. And
he seemed to be unable to quit thinking about it. His



dissatisfaction grew almost to an obsession. Clarence was
mightily dissatisfied.
But when you have worked for a company as long as Clarence
had worked for his streetcar company, you don't just quit because
you decide that you are unhappy. At least; not if you are
interested in whether or not your bread will be buttered.
Besides, Clarence had taken the PMA Science of Success course,
and he had learned that one could be happy on any job if one
wanted to. The thing to do was to adopt the right attitude.
So Clarence decided to take a sensible view of the situation and
see what he could do about it. "How can I be happier on the job?"
he asked himself.
And he came up with a very good answer indeed. He decided that
he would be happier if he made others happy.
Now there were many people whom he could make happy, for he
met many folks on his streetcar every day. He had always been
able to make friends readily, so he thought "I'll use this trait to
make each day a little brighter for every person who boards my
car."
Clarence's plan was wonderful — the customers thought. They
enjoyed his little courtesies and cheerful greetings immensely.
And they were happier, and so was Clarence, as the result of his
cheerfulness and consideration.
But his supervisor took the opposite attitude. So the supervisor
called Clarence in and warned him to stop all this unwonted
affability.



But Clarence paid no attention to the warning. He was having a
good time making others happy. And as far as he and the
customers were concerned, he was making a terrific success of
his job.
Clarence was fired!
So Clarence had a problem — and that was good. At least,
according to the PMA Science of Success course, it was good.
Clarence decided that perhaps he had better visit Napoleon Hill
(who was living in Canton at the time) and see how and why this
problem was so good. He called Mr. Hill and arranged for an
appointment the next afternoon.
"I've read Think and Grow Rich, Mr. Hill, and I've studied the
PMA Science of Success, but somewhere I must have gotten off
on the wrong track." And he told Napoleon Hill what had
happened to him. "Now what do I do?" he concluded.
Napoleon Hill smiled. "Let's look at your problem," he said. "You
were dissatisfied with your work as it was. You did exactly right.
You tried to use your best asset, your friendly and affable
disposition, to do a better job and get and give more satisfaction
on the job. The problem arises from the fact that your superior
didn't have the imagination to see the value of what you were
doing. But that's wonderful! Why? Because now you are in a
position to use your fine personality for even greater goals."
And Napoleon Hill showed Clarence Lantzer that he could use
his fine abilities and friendly disposition to much better
advantage as a salesman than as a streetcar conductor. So
Clarence applied for and got a job as an agent for the New York
Life Insurance Company.



The first prospect Clarence called on was the president of the
streetcar company. Clarence turned his personality loose on this
gentleman, and came out of the office with an application for a
$, policy!
The last time Hill saw Lantzer, he had become one of New York
Life's biggest producers.
%
 The characteristics,
abilities, and capacities that make you happy and successful in
one environment may create an opposite reaction in another. You
have a tendency to do well what you want to do.
You are called a "square peg in a round hole" when you work or
engage in activities that do not come naturally, and that are
inwardly repellent. In such an unhappy situation you can change
your position and place yourself in an environment that is
pleasing to you.
It may not be feasible to change your position. You can then
make adjustments in your environment to coincide with your
characteristics, abilities, and capacities so that you will be happy.
When you do this, you "square the hole." This solution will help
change your attitude from negative to positive.
If you develop and maintain a burning desire to do so, you can
even neutralize and change your tendencies and habits by
establishing new ones. You can "round the peg" if you are
sufficiently motivated. But before you achieve success in
changing your tendencies and habits, be prepared to face mental
and moral conflicts. You can win if you are willing to pay the
price. You may find it difficult to pay each necessary installment
— particularly the first few. But when you have paid in full, the
newly established traits will predominate. The old tendencies and



habits will become dormant. You will be happy because you will
be doing what now comes naturally.
To guarantee success it is desirable that you try zealously to
maintain physical, mental, and moral health during the period of
such an internal struggle.
In the next chapter, "Your Magnificent Obsession," you will see
how to neutralize your mental conflicts.
-. '. /C

. Satisfaction is a mental attitude.
. Your own mental attitude is the one thing you possess over
which you alone have complete control.
. Memorize I feel healthy! I feel happy! I feel terrific!
. When you set a goal — aim higher!
. Know the rules and understand how to apply them.
. Set your target and keep trying until you hit it.
. See beyond the routine. Use the step-stone theory.
. Develop inspirational dissatisfaction.
. What do you do if you are a square peg in a round hole?
DEFEAT MAY BE A STEPPING STONE
OR A STUMBLING BLOCK
DEPENDING ON WHETHER
YOUR ATTITUDE
IS POSITIVE OR NEGATIVE



CHAPTER 
Your Magnificent Obsession
With the idea that we are about to give you, you can have riches
far beyond your fondest hope.
This idea will bring you a wealth of happiness. For your
personality will expand. And you will receive affection and love,
both of a quality and a quantity you have never before dreamed
possible.
This principle was expressed dramatically on many occasions by
the author, Lloyd C. Douglas. When Douglas retired from the
ministry he moved into a more extended form of inspirational
teaching the writing of novels. His ministry had reached
hundreds; his books reached thousands; his movies, millions.
And to each he preached the same basic message. But it was
never so clearly expressed as in the novel The Magnificent
Obsession. The principle is so obvious here that those who need
it most may not see it at all. It is simply this
Develop an obsession — a Magnificent Obsession — to help
others.
Share yourself without expecting a reward, payment, or
commendation. And above all else — keep your good turn a
secret.
And, if you do this, you will set in motion the powers of a
universal law. For, try as you will to avoid payment for your
good deed — blessings and rewards will be showered upon you.
No matter who you are, you can have a Magnificent Obsession.
Every living person can help others by sharing a part of himself.


You don't have to be rich or powerful to develop a Magnificent
Obsession. Regardless of who you are, or what you have been,
you can create inside yourself a burning desire to be helpful to
others.
Take, for example, the sinner with a magnificent obsession.
You'll never know his name. That's a secret. When he was asked
to help the Boys Clubs of America — an organization the sole
purpose of which is the building of character in children — with a
small donation, he refused. In fact, he was more than rude to the
man who had called to interview him on this occasion.
"Get out!" he said. "I'm sick and tired of people asking me for
money!"
As the representative was walking toward the door to leave, he
stopped, turned around, and looked kindly at the man sitting
behind his desk. "You may not wish to share with the needy. But
I do. I'll share with you a part of what I have — a prayer May
God bless you." And then he turned swiftly and left.
You see, with a flash of inspiration the Boys Club representative
had remembered "… silver and gold have I none, but such as I
have give I unto you." And a few days later an interesting thing
happened.
The man who had said, "Get out!" knocked on the door of the
Club representative's office and asked, "May I come in?" He
brought with him a part of what he had to share a check for half
a million dollars. As he laid the check on the desk, he said "I am
giving this on one condition that you never let anyone know that
I did it."
"Why not?" he was asked.


"I don't want my name to represent to boys and girls that I am
good. I'm not a saint. For I have been a sinner."
And that is why you'll never know his name. Just he, the Boys
Club representative, and the Greatest Giver of All know the name
of the sinner whose money was donated for the purpose of
helping boys and girls avoid doing the wrong things he had done.
Like the Boys Club representative, you may not have money, but
you can share by giving a part of what you have. And like him,
you can be a part of a great cause. And you, too, when you give,
can give generously.
Your most preciously valued possessions and your greatest
powers are often necessarily invisible and intangible. No one can
take them. You and you alone can share them.
The more you share, the more you will have.
Now if you doubt this, you can prove it to yourself by giving a
smile to everyone you meet; a kind word; a pleasant response;
appreciation with warmth from the heart; cheer; encouragement;
hope; honor, credit, and applause; good thoughts; evidence of
love for your fellow-men; happiness; a prayer for the godless and
the godly; and time for a worthy cause with eagerness.
If you do experiment by giving any one of the above, you will
also prove to yourself what we have found is one of the most
difficult principles to teach those who need it most how to cause
desirable actions within yourself. Until you do learn, you will fail
to realize that what is left with you when you share it with others
will multiply and grow; and what you withhold from others will
diminish and decrease. Therefore, share that which is good and
desirable and withhold that which is bad and undesirable.



We know of a mother who lost her
only child a beautiful, happy, teen-age girl who brought laughter
and inspiration to all who were fortunate enough to know her. In
attempting to neutralize the grief of her loss, this mother
developed a most magnificent obsession and became a part of a
great cause. Today she is among the many thousands of
American women who are making this world a better world to
live in. Because of the wonderful work she is doing and the
beauty of her Magnificent obsession, we wrote and asked her if
she would be land enough to share with us the inspiration which
helped her develop her Magnificent Obsession. Her response
was
"The searing agony of losing our beloved daughter is never far
away in my mind. Conceived in love and nurtured with love, she
held our entire future and all our hopes in every sense of the
words. The Almighty took our only child from us at the age of
fourteen-and-a-half. It Is impossible to describe our loss. The
bright promise of the future went dull, for the light of our lives
had been snuffed out. Everything that we had lived to the full became empty. All that was sweet turned bitter.
"My husband and I reacted as does everyone. Our very existence
was encompassed by the eternally unanswered question WHY?
My husband retired, we sold our home, and seeking an escape,
did extensive traveling. Only when we came face to face with the
harsh reality that we couldn't run away from our sadness and our
memories did we return. Slowly, ever so slowly, we recognized
that our loss was not exclusive. We had sought solace and found
none, for our motives were self-centered. It took months for my
mind to begin to accept the fact that all the joys of children and
good health and security are blessings the Almighty loans to each
of us. These infinite mercies which we finite persons presume to
take for granted should each be cherished for their true meaning
and great and irreplaceable value.


"How could I earn the right to keep my other blessings? How
could I show my appreciation and thanks to Heaven for allowing
me my husband's love, for living in this great nation of ours, for
my friends and my five unimpaired senses, for all the good things
that surrounded me? Now my efforts to find myself began to
move in the right direction.
"Although bereft of my dearest possession, the Almighty had
given me, in recompense, an empathy with people and a clearer
understanding of the problems besetting each of us.
Proportionately, my own understanding in relation to adjusting to
my loss grew apace, as my service in helping others increased.
"I sought to find the niche in social work that would ultimately
give me the opportunity to leave my small heritage for humanity
in lieu of my beloved daughter and found the answer in City of
Hope.
"Now, as surely as time passes, my peace of mind, call it a
Magnificent Obsession if you will, gains in stature. It is my
earnest wish that all who suffer loss of a loved one can find
comfort and serenity in service to others."
Today the City of Hope, national medical and research center,
renders entirely free patient care. Its services are dispensed on
the highest humanitarian level in the belief that "Man is his
brother's keeper." This wonderful mother found peace of mind in
a truly Magnificent Obsession.
The entire nation — in fact the entire world — can be affected
by the Magnificent Obsession of just one man who wants to share
a part of what he has. Orison Swett Marden was a man who
shared a part of what he had and developed a Magnificent
Obsession that changed the attitude of people from negative to
positive.


+
(
.
At the age of seven Orison Swett Marden became an
orphan. He was "bound out" for his room and board. At an early
age he read Self-Help, by the Scottish author Samuel Smiles who,
like Marden, had become an orphan as a young boy and had
found the secrets of true success. The seeds of thought in SelfHelp created a burning desire in Marden which grew into his
magnificent obsession and made his world a better world in
which to live.
During the boom that preceded the panic of , Marden owned
and operated four hotels. Since their operation was entrusted to
others, he was devoting much of his time to writing a book.
Actually, he was fulfilling a desire to write a book that would
motivate American youth as Self-Help had motivated him. He
was working diligently on his inspirational manuscript when an
ironical twist of fate struck him and tested his mettle.
Marden entitled his work Pushing to the Front. And he took as
his motto "Let Every Occasion Be a Great Occasion for You
Cannot Tell When Fate May Be Taking Your Measure for a
Larger Place!"
And at that very instant Fate was taking his measure for a larger
place. The misfortune that struck him would have ruined many a
man. What happened?
The panic of  struck. Two of the Marden hotels burned to the
ground. His manuscript, nearly completed, was destroyed. His
tangible wealth went down the drain, wiped out.
But Marden had a Positive Mental Attitude. He looked about him
to see what had happened to the nation and himself. His first
conclusion was that the panic was brought on by fear fear of the
value of the American dollar; fear caused by the failure of a few


large corporations; fear of stock values; and fear of industrial
unrest.
Those fears caused the stock market to crash. Five hundred and
sixty-seven banks and loan and trust companies, as well as a
hundred and fifty-six railway companies, failed. Strikes were
prevalent. Unemployment affected millons of persons. Because
of drouth and heat, farmers experienced crop failures.
Marden looked about him at the shambles in material things and
human lives. He saw the great need for someone or something to
inspire the nation and its people. Offers came to him to manage
other hotels. He turned them down. A desire had caught hold of
him, a Magnificent Obsession. And he combined it with PMA.
He set to work on a new book. His new motto, a self-motivator
Every occasion is a great occasion!
"If ever there was a time when America needed the help of a
positive mental attitude, it is now," he told friends.
He worked over a livery stable and lived on one dollar and a half
each week. He worked almost unceasingly, day and night. He
completed the first edition of Pushing to the Front in .
The book received immediate acceptance. It was used extensively
in the public schools as a textbook and as a supplementary reader.
Business houses circulated it among their employees.
Distinguished educators, statesmen and members of the clergy,
merchants, and sales managers commended it as a most powerful
motivator to a positive mental attitude. And, in time, it was
printed in twenty-five different languages. Millions of copies
were sold.
Marden, like the authors of Success Through a Positive Mental
Attitude, believed that character is the cornerstone in building


and maintaining success. He believed the highest and best
achievements are noble manhood and womanhood, and that the
achievement of true integrity and well-rounded character is in
itself success. He taught the secrets of financial and business
success. But he also entered a perpetual protest against dollar
chasing and over-reaching greed. He taught there is something
infinitely better than making a living It is making a noble life.
Marden showed how some men may make millions and still be
utter failures. Those who sacrifice their families, reputation,
health — everything — for dollars are failures in life, regardless
of how much money they may accumulate. He also taught that
one may succeed without be coming a president or a millionaire.
Perhaps one of the greatest achievements of Marden's
Magnificent Obsession was the awakening of men and women to
the realization that they could experience success if they would
only employ the virtues they would like their children to have.
Perhaps fully as rewarding to Marden, Pushing to the Front was
instrumental in changing the attitude of an entire nation from
negative to positive. And that influence was felt throughout the
world.
Marden demonstrated that a burning desire can generate the drive
to action that is imperative for great achievement.
As you have seen, it took courage and sacrifice for Orison Swett
Marden to bring his Magnificent Obsession into reality.
A Magnificent Obsession does take courage. You may need to
stand alone in combating and repelling the ridicule and ignorance
of the experts. Like great discoverers, creators, inventors,
philosophers, and geniuses, you may be termed "crazy," "nuts,"
or a "crackpot." The experts may say what you are trying to do


can't be done. With time your burning desire and constant effort
will bring your Magnificent Obsession into reality. When they
say, "It can't be done," find a way to do it!
(

.

%
;Many years ago, a student at the University
of Chicago and his friends went to hear a lecture by Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle on spiritualism. They went for a lark. They meant
to scoff. One of these students, J. B. Rhine, was impressed by the
seriousness of the speaker. He began to listen. Certain ideas impressed him. He couldn't dismiss them from his mind. Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle referred to men of great repute who were searching
into the realm of psychic phenomena. J. B. Rhine decided to
investigate and to engage in some research.
In referring to the incident some time ago, Dr. Rhine, Director of
The Parapsychology Laboratory at Duke University in North
Carolina, said "There were things said there that I should have
known as a college student. During and after the lecture I began
to recognize some of them. My education had omitted many of
the things that were important, such as ways of seeking the unknown. I began to see some of the faults of the educational
system of the day."
He became interested in the freedom of all to secure new
knowledge. He began to resent a system whereby seeking the
truth in any form, or on any issue, became a taboo. He began to
develop a burning desire to learn the truth scientifically regarding
man's psychic powers. His burning desire turned into a
Magnificent Obsession.
Rhine had planned to devote his life to college teaching. He was
warned that he would lose his reputation and that his earning
power as a teacher would be impaired. His friends and college
professors ridiculed him and endeavored to discourage him.


Some began to shun him. "I must find out for myself," he told a
scientist friend.
The friend responded "When you do find out, keep it to yourself!
No one is going to believe!"
He did keep his discoveries to himself until he was able to
develop confirmed scientific proof. Today he is honored and
respected throughout the world.
Over the past forty-five years his battles have been figuratively
knuckle fighting every inch of the ground in combating taboos,
ignorance, antagonism, and ridicule.
One of the greatest obstacles with which Dr. Rhine has been
constantly plagued over the years has been the lack of the
necessary money for expanding his research. At one time, for
example, his only EEG machine was assembled from the remains
of one found in a junk pile.
It had been discarded by a hospital.
Have you ever thought that you can develop a Magnificent
Obsession by becoming a part of a great cause and by sharing a
part of what you have? If you have, you already realize that there
are many college and university professors today whose
Magnificent Obsessions are to seek the truth in various fields so
that all mankind may be benefited by their discoveries. Because
such persons spend all their time in searching for these truths,
they are almost always handicapped by the lack of money to buy
necessary equipment, provide for their own livelihood and the
livings of others engaged in working on the project, etc.



You can become a part of such a cause and thus fulfill a
magnificent obsession of your own. You can find such a
dedicated person in almost any college or university.
Money and a Magnificent Obsession! You might ask How can
we mention money in the same breath with a Magnificent
Obsession? If you did we would respond "Isn't money good?"
Is money good? Many negative-minded persons
say, "Money is the root of all evil." But the Bible says Love of
money is the root of all evil. And there is a big difference between
the two even though one little word makes the difference.
It has been amazing to the authors to observe negative-minded
persons react unfavorably to Think and Grow Rich and its
contents. For these negative-minded persons might earn in a
single year more than they now earn in a lifetime by changing
their attitude from negative to positive. To do this it would be
necessary to clear the cobwebs from their thinking regarding
money.
In our society money is the medium of exchange. Money is
power. Like all power, money can be used for good or for evil.
Think and Grow Rich has motivated many thousands of its
readers to acquire great wealth through PMA. They have been
inspired in Think and Grow Rich by the biographies of such men
as Henry Ford, William Wrigley, Henry L. Doherty, John D.
Rockefeller, Thomas Alva Edison, Edward A. Filene, Julius
Rosenwald, Edward J. Bok, and Andrew Carnegie.
Now the men whose names you have just read established
Foundations which even to this day have in the j aggregate in
excess of one billion dollars money set aside exclusively for
charitable, religious, and educational purposes. Today



expenditures and grants from these Foundations total in excess of
$ million in a single year.
Is money good? We know it is.
The Magnificent Obsessions of these men will live in perpetuity.
And the story of the life of Andrew Carnegie will convince the
reader that Carnegie shared with others a part of what he had
money, philosophy, and something more, In fact, Success
Through a Positive Mental Attitude would not have been written
if it were not for Andrew Carnegie. That is why this book is
dedicated to him, and to you.
Let's talk about him and you. Let's learn from his philosophy.
Let's see how we can apply it in our lives.
(
.
;A
poor Scottish immigrant boy became the richest man in America.
His inspiring story and motivating philosophy are found in the
Autobiography of Andrew Carnegie.
As a boy and throughout his life Carnegie was motivated by a
simple fundamental philosophy Anything in life worth having is
worth working fort This simple philosophy grew into a
Magnificent Obsession.
And before he died at the age of eighty-three, Carnegie had
worked diligently for many years to share his great wealth
intelligently with those then living and with future generations.
While he lived, Carnegie was successful in giving approximately
a half billion dollars through direct grants, Foundations, and
trusts. His contribution of millions of dollars for the



establishment of libraries is a well-known example of the
application of his standard
Anything in life worth having is worth working for!
And the books in these libraries have been, and will continue to
be, of benefit only to those persons who work to get the
knowledge, understanding, and wisdom they contain by reading
and studying them.
In the year , Napoleon Hill, at the age of eighteen, while
working his way through college as a reporter for a magazine,
interviewed the great steelmaker, philosopher, and philanthropist.
The first interview lasted three hours. And then the great man
invited the youngster to his home.
For three days Carnegie indoctrinated Napoleon Hill with his
philosophy. And be finally inspired the young reporter to devote
at least twenty years of his life to study, research, and find the
simple, underlying principles of success. Andrew Carnegie told
Napoleon Hill that his greatest wealth consisted not in money but
in what he termed — the philosophy of American achievement.
He commissioned Napoleon Hill as his agent to share it with the
world.
And in this book he is sharing it with you.
While he lived, Andrew Carnegie helped Napoleon Hill by giving
him letters of introduction to the great men and women of his
day. He advised him. He shared his thoughts with him. He helped
him in every way, with but one exception — money. For he said,
"Anything in life worth having is worth working for."
Now he knew that this self-motivator, when applied, would
attract happiness and physical, mental, and spiritual health as well


as wealth. Everyone can learn and apply Andrew Carnegie's
principles.
It is customary for a man to share a part of his tangible wealth
with his loved ones as he goes through life, or he may do so in his
will. This world would be a better world to live in if each person
would leave, as an inheritance to posterity, the philosophy and
know-how that brought him happiness, physical, mental and
spiritual health and wealth — as did Andrew Carnegie.
The writings of Napoleon Hill make available to you the
principles whereby Carnegie acquired his great wealth. They are
just as applicable to you as they were to him.
Another wealthy man who had a Magnificent Obsession and
shared a part of what he had was Michael L. Benedum. His close
friend, United States Senator Jennings Randolph, told us
Benedum started on a salary of twenty-five dollars a week and
became one of the richest men in America. He was worth over
one hundred million dollars. And yet, the turning point in his
career followed a very very minor incident.
As a young man of twenty-five, Benedum courteously gave his
seat on a train to an elderly stranger. To Benedum it was the
obvious thing to do. And the elderly stranger turned out to be
John Worthington, General Superintendent of the South Perm Oil
Company. In the conversation that followed, Worthington offered
Mike Benedum a job. Benedum accepted and eventually became
"the discoverer of more oil than any other single individual who
ever lived."
Some people say you can judge a man by the philosophy by
which he lives. Mike Benedum's philosophy about money went
something like this "I'm just a trustee for it and will be held
accountable for the good I can accomplish with it, both in the


community as a whole and in behalf of opportunities for people
coming up — even as I was given an opportunity, back when."
Like so many others with a Magnificent Obsession, Benedum
lived to a ripe old age. On his eighty-fifth birthday, he said "I
have been asked how I keep going at my age. My formula is to
keep busy so that the years go by unnoticed. To despise nothing
except selfishness, meanness, and corruption. To fear nothing
except cowardice, disloyalty, and indifference. To covet nothing
that is my neighbor's except his kindness of heart and his
gentleness of spirit. To think many, many times of my friends
and, if possible, seldom of my enemies. As I see it, age is not a
question of years. It is a state of mind. You are as young as your
faith, and today I think I have more faith in my fellow man, in my
country, and in my God than I have ever had."

(
.
Of course, it's
the old story the man who has something to live for lives longer.
We realized this when we became well acquainted with men like
the Honorable Herbert Hoover and General Robert E. Wood, who
were doing so much for American youth when they shared their
time and money with the Boys Clubs of America. And they were
long-lived because of their Magnificent Obsessions. They
devoted their thinking and time to projects that benefited others
and, because their lives were the good lives of men with
Magnificent Obsessions, they experienced the pleasure and
therapeutic value of the esteem and love of their fellow men.
Of course, you may not have the material wealth of an Andrew
Carnegie or a Michael L. Benedum but that does not deprive you
of building your own Magnificent Obsession. At least, it didn't
Irving Rudolph.
*
D
;Irving devoted his
life to helping boys in blighted neighborhoods. This work was in


gratitude for having been saved by a new Boys Club in the rough
neighborhood in which he was raised.
How did Irving Rudolph get started in Boys Club work?
He lived in a poor neighborhood — North Avenue and Halsted
Street in Chicago. He traveled with a tough crowd. There was
plenty of trouble. Plenty of things for boys to get into that they
shouldn't. And not much to occupy their time to keep them out of
trouble. One day a Boys Club was started in an abandoned church
in the neighborhood.
"My brother and I were the only two fellows in our gang who
visited the Club," Irving explained. "They're all in jail but my
brother and me. If it hadn't been for the Lincoln Unit Boys Club,
we'd be there, too."
Irving was grateful for what the Boys Club did for him and his
brother. And he devoted his life to helping boys in blighted
neighborhoods. Through his enthusiasm and zeal, large donations
were received to support the Chicago Boys Clubs. Through him,
men and women of influence were attracted to this cause.
"I feel that my work is only a token payment of my gratitude to a
Higher Power for bringing me and my brother under this
influence," Irving explained. Then he added, "Just visit a Boys
Club. See for yourself the good work that is being done. You will
then feel a part of what I feel for the kids who have the need I
had."
Now there are thousands of men and women who are fulfilling
their Magnificent Obsessions in sacrificing time and money to
help the Boy Scouts of America. Your life has benefited from
their Magnificent Obsessions if...



If you do your best to try never to violate your honor by lying or
cheating and always try to fulfill the responsibility with which
you are entrusted…
If you keep clean in thought and body — if you exemplify clean
habits, clean speech, clean sport — if you associate with a clean
crowd…
If you stand up for the rights of others against the undesirable
influence and coaxing of friends and threats of enemies — if
defeat inspires you to try to succeed — if you have the courage to
face danger in spite of fear…
If you work faithfully and make the best of your opportunities —
if you don't wantonly destroy property — if you save money so
that you can pay your own way in this world and yet be generous
to those in need and give financial help and time to worthy causes
— if you do a good turn each day without expecting
compensation…
If you are a friend to all and a brother to every living man,
woman, and child regardless of race, color, or creed . . .
If you are prepared to learn to know dangers, to avoid negligence
and to know the remedies necessary to help injured persons and
save human lives, to share the duties and responsibilities in your
home and place of business…
If you are polite to all, especially to the weak, helpless, and
unfortunate…
If you will not kill or hurt any living creature needlessly, but
strive to protect all living animals…



If you smile when you can, do your work promptly and
cheerfully — and if you never shirk or grumble at responsibilities
or hardships…
If you are loyal to all to whom loyalty is due, to the members of
your family, the firm for which you work and your country…
If you respect duly constituted authorities and obey that which
does not violate your moral code…
If you do your best to do your duty to God and your country, to
help other people at all times, to keep yourself physically strong,
mentally awake, and morally straight…
Then you live and act in response to the imprint in your
subconscious mind of the Oath and Law of the Boy Scouts of
America. What kind of a person would you be if you lived up to
these standards?
America is great because its people live by a great philosophy. It
can be symbolized in the phrase The Great American Heart.
Henry J. Kaiser was another with a Magnificent Obsession. He
did so much to make his world a better world to live in. A
quotation that hung on the wall of a blacksmith shop in England
inspired him as it may also inspire you. It is

! /'


I '

,/

'
'
%

! =
# ,
!



In reading up to this point you started Where the Road to
Achievement Began. You were awakened by Five Mental
Bombshells for Attacking Success. And you have been given the



Key to The Citadel of Wealth. Now Get Ready to Succeed! That
is the purpose of the following chapters.
-. '. /=

. To develop a Magnificent Obsession Share yourself with
others without expecting a reward, payment or commendation.
Keep your good turns a secret.
. Regardless of who you are, or what you have been, you can
create inside yourself a burning desire to be helpful to others.
You can develop your own Magnificent Obsession if you have
PMA.
. When you share with others a part of what you have, that
which remains will multiply and grow. The more you share,
the more you will have. Therefore, share that which is good
and desirable, and withhold that which is bad and undesirable.
. You can develop your own Magnificent Obsession by
becoming a part of a good cause, as did the mother who lost
her only child.
. Character is the cornerstone in building and maintaining
success. But how can you improve your own character?
Success Through a Positive Mental Attitude will help you find
the right answers.
. There is something infinitely better than making a living it is
making a noble life. Do you believe this? If you do, what will
you do about it?
. A burning desire can generate the drive to action that is
imperative to great achievement. To develop a burning desire
to achieve a specific goal, daily keep the goal before you. And
strive to achieve it.


. It takes courage and sacrifice to develop and maintain a
Magnificent Obsession. You may need to stand alone against
the ridicule and ignorance of others, as did Dr. Joseph Banks
Rhine.
. Some people say money is the root of all evil. But the Bible
says Love of money is the root of all evil. The good or evil of
money is contingent on a little difference. That little difference
is whether your attitude is positive or negative.
. Men like Andrew Carnegie, Henry Ford, Michael Benedum
used the power of their money to establish charitable,
educational, and religious Foundations. The good that has been
done by the Magnificent Obsessions of such men will live in
perpetuity!
. Anything in life worth having is worth working for.
. When you are asked to give money or time to a worthy cause,
repeat to yourself


I '

!


,/

'

! =
# ,

/'
'

!



%



THAT WHICH YOU SHARE WITH OTHERS
WILL MULTIPLY AND
THAT WHICH YOU WITHHOLD
WILL DIMINISH!


#

;



CHAPTER 
How to Raise Your Energy Level
How is your energy level today? Did you wake up eager to face
the tasks ahead? Did you push your chair back from the breakfast
table with the feeling that you were rarin' to go? And did you
plunge into your work with enthusiasm?
You didn't? Perhaps for some time now you just haven't had the
vim and vigor you think you should have. Perhaps you feel tired
before the day begins, and drag through your work without joy.
If so, let's do something about it!
Vernon Wolfe, track coach, is an expert who can show us what to
do. He is one of the outstanding coaches in the country. Under his
tutelage, several high school students have broken national prep
school records.
How does he train these stars? Wolfe has a double prescription.
He teaches them to condition both their minds and their bodies
simultaneously.
"If you believe you can do it," says Vernon Wolfe, "most of the
time you can. It's mind over matter."
You have two types of energy. One is physical, the other is
mental and spiritual. The latter is by far the more important, for
from your subconscious mind you can draw vast power and
strength in time of need.
Think, for example, of the great feats of strength and endurance
you've read about people performing while under the stress of
intense emotion. There is an automobile accident and a husband


is pinned under the overturned car. In her moment of fear and
determination, his tiny and frail wife manages to raise the car
enough to free him! Or the insane person, his mind dominated by
his subconscious running wild, can break, lift, bend, and smash
with a force he never could hope for during periods of normality.
In a series of articles for Sports Illustrated, Dr. Roger Bannister
told how he first broke the four-minute mile on May , , by
training both his mind and his muscles to accomplish this longsought dream of the athletic world. For months, he conditioned
his subconscious into the belief that the record, which some
people claimed was unattainable, could be achieved. Others
thought of the four-minute mark as a barrier. Bannister thought of
it as a gateway which, if he once passed through, would I open
the way to many new records for himself and other milers.
And of course he was right. Roger Bannister led the way. In a
period of little more than four years after he first set a fourminute mile, the feat was performed  times by himself and
other runners! And in one race, at Dublin, Ireland, on August ,
, five runners ran the mile in less than four minutes!
The man who taught Roger Bannister the secret was Dr. Thomas
Kirk Cureton, director of the physical fitness laboratory at the
University of Illinois. Dr. Cureton has developed revolutionary
ideas concerning the body's energy level. They apply, he says, to
both athletes and non-athletes. They can make a runner run faster
and the average man live longer.
"There is no reason why," Dr. Cureton says, "any man can't be as
fit at  as he was at  — providing he knows how to train his
body."
Dr. Cureton's system is based on two principles () Train the
whole body. () Push yourself to the limit of endurance,
extending the limit with each workout.


"The art of record-breaking," he says, "is the ability to take more
out of yourself than you've got. You punish yourself more and
more and rest between spells."
Dr. Cureton became acquainted with Roger Bannister while
running physical fitness tests on European athletic stars. He
noticed that Bannister's body was wonderfully developed in some
ways. For example, his heart was  percent larger than normal in
relation to his body size.
But, in other ways, Bannister wasn't as well developed as the
average man. Bannister took Cureton's advice to develop his
whole body. He learned to condition his mind by taking up
mountain climbing. This taught him how to overcome obstacles.
Equally important, he learned to break big goals down into little
ones. Roger Bannister reasoned that a man ran a single quartermile faster than he ran the four quarters of a full mile. So he
trained himself to think of the four quarters in the mile separately.
In his training, he would dash a quarter mile, then jog a lap
around the track to rest Then he would dash another quarter mile.
Each time, he aimed to run the quarter in  seconds or less.
Fifty-eight times four equals  seconds, or three minutes and
 seconds. He ran to the point of collapse. Then he would rest.
Each time, the point of collapse was pushed back a little. When
he finally ran his great race, it was in three minutes, .
seconds!
Dr. Cureton taught Roger Bannister that "the more the body
endures, the more it will endure." Beliefs about "overtraining"
and "staleness," he says, are myths.
But he emphasizes that rest is as important as exercise activity.
The body needs to rebuild in even larger quantities what has been
torn down in exercise. That's how strength, vitality, energy are
developed. The body and mind both recharge themselves during


periods of rest and relaxation. If you don't give them a chance to
do so, severe damage — and even death — can result.
Is it time to recharge your battery? There's no glory in being the
richest man in the graveyard. You don't want to be the best
scientist, doctor, executive, salesman, or employee lying —
prematurely — under the most ornate headstone. A loved
mother, wife, father, son, or daughter can bring happiness. Why
then, bring grief, instead? Why be confined to a mental
sanitarium or lie embalmed six feet under a blanket of beautiful
green grass — simply because a needless drain damaged a battery
that wasn't recharged?
The small child doesn't know when he is excessively tired. But he
surely shows it in his behavior and actions. The adolescent may
realize he is over-fatigued, but refuse to admit it — even to
himself. Then sexual, family, scholastic, and social problems may
seem unsolvable and unbearable. They may motivate him to
temporary or permanent destructive acts — acts that injure
himself and others.
When your energy level is low, your health and your desirable
characteristics may be subdued by the negative. You, like a
storage battery, are dead when your energy level is zero. What is
the solution? Recharge your battery? How? Relax, play, rest, and
sleep!
&
Here is a
checklist to help you determine your present energy level. You
can use it whenever you feel that your energy level is slipping. If
you are a well-balanced person, your battery may need recharging
when you act and feel

)






N
/
$
@




!

?



! 



!





(
"
;When
you are fatigued, your usually positive, desirable feelings,
emotions, thoughts, and actions have a tendency to turn negative.
When you are rested and in good health, the direction is changed
back to positive. Fatigue often brings out the worst within you.
When your battery is charged and your energy and activity level
is up to standard, you are at your best! That is when you think
and act with PMA!
If your feelings and actions indicate that your better qualities are
being subdued by those which are undesirable and negative, it's
time to recharge your battery!
Yes, to maintain your level of both physical and mental energy
you need to exercise both your body and mind. But there is a
third factor. Your body and mind both! need to be fed properly.
You help to maintain your physical body by taking in quantities
of wholesome, nutritious foods. You maintain your mental and
spiritual vigor by absorbing mental and spiritual vitamins from
inspirational and religious books.

"
;George
Scarseth, Ph.D., former Director of Research for the American
Farm Research Association in Lafayette, Indiana, told about a
village on the seacoast of Africa. The village is more advanced
than a community of similar tribes in the interior. Why? Because
its inhabitants are physically stronger and more mentally alert —
they have more bodily energy — than the ulterior tribesmen. The


difference between the tribesmen on the coast and those living
inland stems from a difference in diet. The village tribesmen in
the ulterior do not have a sufficient amount of protein whereas
those on the coast obtain quantities from the fish they eat.
In his book, Climate Makes the Man, Clarence Mills wrote that
the United States Government found some inhabitants of the
Isthmus of Panama excessively sluggish in their mental and
physical activity. A scientific study disclosed that both the plant
and animal life, on which they depended for food, lacked the B
vitamins. When thiamine was added to their diet, the same people
became more energetic and active.
If you suspect that your diet is deficient in certain vitamins and
elements so that your energy level is depressed, you should do
something about it. A good cookbook can help you, and there are
government pamphlets available at low cost If the condition
persists, have a physical checkup.
Like your body, your subconscious mind will accept and absorb
mental and spiritual vitamins without effort. But, unlike your
physical body, the subconscious will digest and retain unlimited
quantities. Unlike your stomach, it never becomes stuffed! It will
take and hold as much as you feed it — and still hold more!
Where will you find these mental and spiritual vitamins? In
books such as those recommended in  , "The Amazing
Power of a Bibliography!"
In effect, the subconscious mind is like a battery. From it, you
can obtain tremendous surges of mental and spiritual energy
which often transmute themselves into physical vitality. These
jolts of energy will go to waste if we permit them to be shortcircuited by needless negative emotions. But used constructively,



this energy can multiply itself many times, just as a powerhouse
generator produces vast amounts of useful power.
The late William C. Lengel, who was a prominent editor-in-chief
in the book publishing business, illustrated this point beautifully
in an article for Success Unlimited magazine. Lengel described
how energy is wasted through needless "worry, hate, fear,
suspicion, anger and rage."
"All these waste elements," he said, "could just as easily be
transformed into power-producing units."
To illustrate his point, Mr. Lengel drew a picture of an electrical
power plant "… the open mouths of the furnaces, the red flames
roaring inside, the water in the steam gauges bobbing at proper
temperature level, the steam driving the pistons turning the great
generators, the copper commutators — golden surfaces —
revolving so fast they seem motionless, green and blue sparks
flashing from under the brushes, thick cables hooked up to the
switchboard, carrying the electric current throughout a city for
thousands of useful purposes.
"Then the other side of the picture," Lengel continued. "Same
plant, same boilers, engines, generators. The only difference
being that the switchboard was dark and the heavy cables, instead
of being hooked up to the switch- board were stuck down into a
barrel of water while the workmen ran tests on the plant. All of
the power is, in effect, wasted. Not an elevator able to run, not a
machine able to operate, not a single bulb able to light."
And Lengel concluded that in the same way "a failure uses up as
much energy in his work at failing as a successful person uses in
winning success."



Tommy Bolt, the golf champion, used to waste his energy that
way. If he sliced a ball or missed the green, he would let go with
a fit of temper. Frequently, he'd be come so angry that he'd wrap
a golf club around the nearest tree.
When he read the famous prayer of St. Francis of Assisi, it
changed him into a man who directed his energy into the most
fruitful channels. The prayer Tommy new peace of mind and ever
since then he carried in his pocket a card imprinted with a portion
the prayer. It reads
!
#


! ' #

/

/


=

Man is the only member of the animal kingdom who, through the
functioning of his conscious mind, can voluntarily control his
emotions from within, rather than be forced to do so by external
influences. He alone can deliberately change habits of emotional
response. The more civilized, cultured, and refined you are, the
easier you can control your emotions and feelings — if you
choose to do so.
Fear, for example, is good under certain circumstances. If it were
not for fear of water, many children would drown. However, it is
entirely possible that you are wasting your mental and spiritual
energy in this or other misdirected emotions. If so, you can throw
a switch to direct the energy into useful channels. How? By
keeping your mind on the things you do want and off the things
you don't want. Your emotions are immediately subject to action.
Therefore, get into action. Substitute a positive feeling for the
negative one. For example, if you are fearful and want to be
courageous, act courageous!



If you want to be energetic, act energetic. But make sure, of
course, that your energy is expended to a good and useful
purpose.
Dawn Fraser of Australia gives us a wonderful case in point.
Born on the "wrong side of the tracks" in Bal-main, a waterside
suburb of Sydney, Dawn had an anemic body. But she had a
king-size determination to become a great swimming champion.
She became the world's fastest woman swimmer. She was good.
But sometimes she wasn't quite good enough to satisfy herself.
While flying home from the Cardiff Empire Games, she read a
book. It was Think and Grow Rich. "I found Napoleon Hill's
formulas for success most inspiring," she says. "I began thinking
about our defeat by the English girls in the medley relay when, in
the freestyle leg, I swam . seconds. That was six-tenths of a
second faster than my own world record, but still not good
enough to give us the -yard start we needed.
"I wondered whether I had given everything in me on that final
lap."
Dawn Fraser began thinking about the dream she'd had for so
long — to become the first woman to swim  meters in less
than  seconds. "The Magic Minute," she called it.
"If I could have made that final leg in the magic minute, we
might have won," she thought.
"From that moment the old hope of cracking the minute became a
burning desire with me. Call it a controlled obsession if you like.
I made it my major ambition and formed a plan of positive action
with the magic minute as my goal. As Mr. Hill advises, I decided
to go the extra mile — mentally as well as physically."



In addition to training her body, Miss Fraser now conditions her
mind as well. Although she has yet to achieve her "Magic
Minute" as of this writing, she has cracked record after record.
Athletic coaches throughout Australia have been attracted to
study Napoleon Hill's teachings, according to Thomas H.
Wyngard, an Australian newspaperman.
"Top coaches, in their search for methods that will give their
champions just that little bit extra over and above their regular
scientifically devised training program, are finding new
inspiration in the doctrines of the great American expert,"
Wyngard says.
"They are adapting Napoleon Hill's technique of mental approach
to what is, essentially, a physical problem. Some have taken the
PMA Science of Success course so they may apply the principles
correctly."
Is it time for you to recharge your battery? Have yon now begun
to apply the principles presented in Success Through a Positive
Mental Attitude? Are you ready to become a champion? If so,
you will want to learn how you can enjoy good health and live
longer — the subject of our next chapter.
-. '. />

. How is your energy level at this moment?
. What is your most important source of physical, mental, and
spiritual energy?



. How can you apply the principles Dr. Thomas Kirk Cureton
taught to Roger Bannister so that you'll have extra energy to
achieve your own goals?
. Do you push to the limit of your endurance-then rest and try
again?
. Is it time to recharge your battery?
. How can you avoid or neutralize fatigue?
. Are most of your meals based on well-balanced diets?
. Do you take spiritual and mental vitamins daily by reading
inspirational material or listening to inspirational tapes or
records?
. Is your energy being directed toward useful channels? Or is it
being short-circuited and wasted?
. "A failure uses up as much energy in his work at failing as a
successful person uses in winning success."
. "God grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot
change, the courage to change the things I can, and the
wisdom to know the difference."
. When is the emotion of fear justified? Unjustified?
. To be energetic, act energetically!
INCREASE YOUR ENERGY
LEVEL THROUGH PMA!



CHAPTER 
You Can Enjoy Good
Health and Live Longer
Positive Mental Attitude plays an important role in your health
and your day-to-day energies and enthusiasms for your life and
your work. "Every day in every way, through the grace of God, I
am getting better and better," is no pie-in-the-sky jargon for the
man who recites the sentence several times each day upon
awakening and again before going to bed.
In one sense, he is putting PMA forces to work for him. He is
using the forces which attract the better things of life to him. He
is using the forces which the authors of Success Through a
Positive Mental Attitude want you to use.
&
(
PMA will help you develop mental and
physical health and a longer life. And NMA will just as surely
undermine mental and physical health and shorten your life. It all
depends upon which side of the talisman you turn up. Positive
Mental Attitude properly employed has saved the lives of many
persons because someone close to them had a strong Positive
Mental Attitude. The following incident proves the point.
The baby was only two days old when the doctor said, "The child
won't live."
"The child will live!" responded the father. The father had a
Positive Mental Attitude — he had faith — he believed in the
miracle of prayer. He prayed. He also believed in action. And he
got into action! He placed the child under the care of a
pediatrician who also had a Positive Mental Attitude — a doctor
who knew from experience that for every physical weakness
Nature provides a compensating factor. The child did live!


I CANT GO ON!
DEATH SEPARATES PAIR — FOR INSTANT
The above headline appeared in the Chicago Daily News. The
article mentioned that a building engineer — a sixty-two-year-old
man — came home and went to bed with chest pains and
shortness of breath. His wife, who was ten years younger, became
alarmed and began hopefully to rub her husband's arms to
increase circulation. But he died.
"I can't stand to go on any more," the widow told her mother,
who was beside her.
And then the widow died. She died that very same day!
The baby that lived and the widow who died demonstrate the
powerful forces of positive and negative mental attitudes.
Knowing that accentuating the positive will attract good things to
you and accepting the negative will bring the bad, isn't it common
sense to develop positive thoughts and attitudes?
If you have not already done so, now is the time to develop a
PMA philosophy. Prepare for any possible emergency. Always
have something to live for. And remember, when you have
something to live for, the subconscious mind forces upon your
conscious mind strong motivating factors to keep you alive in
times of emergency. We need look no further than Rafael Correa
to prove our point.
He was only twenty years of age. His family
was not wealthy, yet it was particularly well esteemed. Therefore,
six doctors and a young intern had struggled all night in that
small operating room at San Juan, Puerto Rico, trying to save
Rafael's life. Now, after twelve hours of unceasing watchfulness
and attention, they were tired. And they were sleepy. Try as they


would, they were finally unable to hear his heart beat. They
couldn't find his pulse.
The head surgeon took a knife and cut the blood vessels in
Rafael's wrist. The fluid was yellow. The surgeon hadn't used an
anesthetic — for the boy's body was so weak that pain didn't
seem possible. The doctors thought he could not hear what they
were saying. And they spoke as if he were dead. One said, "Not
even a miracle can save him now!"
The chief surgeon took off his surgical coat and prepared to leave
the room. The young intern asked, "May I have the body?" "Yes,"
was the response. The doctors left the room.
It has been written So we do not lose heart… Because we look
not to the things that are seen but to the things that are unseen;
for the things that are seen are transient, but the things that are
unseen are eternal.
They could see the physical body, but Rafael was a mind with a
body. What was happening to the mind of Rafael Correa which
was not visible?
In that twilight state between life and death, Rafael was not able
consciously to move his body. But because of the positive mental
attitude he had developed in his subconscious mind by reading
inspirational books, his mind was communicating with a Higher
Power. He felt that God was with him.
He began to speak to God as a friend — like a man talking with
another. "You know me — You are inside me — You are my
blood — You are my life — You are my everything. There is but
one mind — one principle — one substance in the universe, and I
am one with all else.



"If I die, I don't lose anything. I just change form. But I am only
twenty years old. Dear God, I'm not afraid to die — but I'm
willing to live! If You choose to give me life, some day,
somehow, I'll be able and willing through Your mercy to lead a
better life and to help others."
As the intern approached Rafael, he looked at Rafael's face and
observed the twitching of his eyelids and a teardrop falling from
the corner of his left eye. "Doctor, doctor, come quickly! I think
he's alive!" he called excitedly.
It took more than a year for him to regain his strength, But Rafael
Correa did live!
Some years later Rafael flew from San Juan to Chicago to ask the
authors to hold a three-evening PMA seminar at San Juan. It was
then that Rafael told us his story of that eventful night in his life.
We were inspired by his story and particularly also by the fact
that since he had been granted his life, he was trying to make
good on his promise to help others. We flew to San Juan to
conduct the seminar.
While we were in San Juan, Rafael introduced us to the chief
surgeon who had been with him all that night, and the doctor
confirmed Rafael's story. During the course of the conversation
we asked Rafael, "What was the name of the book that influenced
you in your hour of need?" Rafael replied
"I had read many inspirational books, but I believe the thoughts
that went through my mind that night were primarily from
Science and Health, With Key to the Scriptures by Mary Baker
Eddy."



As proved by Rafael, inspirational books are tremendously
instrumental in changing lives. And there is no book with more
inspiration and motivation than the Bible. The Bible has changed
the lives of more persons than any other book. It has helped
countless thousands to develop physical, mental, and moral
health. Reading the Bible has developed a greater understanding
of Its truths in many persons and caused them to draw closer to
their own church. This is because the Bible has motivated them to
positive action.
An inspirational book like the one you are now reading can also
motivate you. It can be the catalyst which starts you on the road
to desirable, positive action and success.

+
The dictionary defines a catalyst in
physical chemistry as a substance that causes or accelerates a
chemical reaction. The dictionary further states that an anticatalyst, or negative catalyst, retards a reaction.
The authors recommend that you use good inspirational books as
positive catalysts to accelerate your progress toward achievement
of true success in life. And they hasten to warn that you choose
such catalysts with care. In   of this book, entitled "The
Amazing Power of a Bibliography," you will find listed many
books which the authors guarantee can act as positive catalysts in
your life — if you are ready.
Martin J. Kohe in his book Your Greatest Power tells of a British
regiment that used the st Psalm as a catalyst to aid them not
just to achieve a material goal, but for the very preservation of
life itself.
Kohe wrote "F. L. Rawson, noted engineer and one of England's
greatest scientists, in his book, Life Understood, gives an account
of a British regiment under control of Colonel Whitlesey, which


served in the World War for more than four years without losing
a man. This unparalleled record was made possible by means of
active cooperation of officers and men in memorizing and
repeating regularly the words of the st Psalm, which has been
called the Psalm of Protection."
Protection of your life can also be accomplished by protecting
your health. And, let there be no misunderstanding about it! Your
health is one of your most valuable assets. Many a man today
would be more than willing to trade his wealth for good health.
!*
;! It is said that a
healthy, ambitious eighteen-year-old clerk in a produce firm in
Cleveland, Ohio, developed a major definite aim of becoming the
world's richest man. At the age of fifty-seven he retired on
doctor's orders. Like many American businessmen, he had it —
stomach ulcers and shot nerves! In addition, he was a hated man.
"I'd rather have my health than his money," many said. John K.
Winkler tells the story in John D., a Portrait in Oils.



"
When John D. Rockefeller
retired from active business, his major definite aims were to
develop a healthy body, maintain a healthy mind, live a long life
and later, to win the esteem of his fellowmen. Could money buy
these? It did! Here's how Rockefeller did it and what it can mean
to you Rockefeller




'
!

=

'
!



=
=

) '

#

=" #

=
%



!
=

# (
#

=

#

=
#

!

#

#  !
!
#


#

?

!

#

=
# =)

#

!
&

!
! =

! 
#
!
!

! 
#

#
! #
#
#
# #
!
#

=
!




&

#


#
= )
!


#
!
! = &= 
="

(
=



#
!

!

#!


! =)

@ '

=

!

@ '

#
! !

!

!

!
=

# =)
!

=

 #
! !
! !
'=

&= " !
 '
' I &= # 

#


=

=
!
!

="
 
=

!


!



#
!

! ="
=) #
I &= @ '

!

=

! '
#

!
#



You shouldn't have to amass a fortune before you come to realize
that PMA will attract perfect health. But there are some other
ingredients which should be used along with PMA and one of
them is health education. Don't be ignorant about your health.
 +
;What do you
know about Hygiene? Hygiene is defined as "a system of
principles or rules designed for the promotion of health." Social
Hygiene often refers specifically to venereal contagion. Ignorance
of physical, mental, and social hygiene can lead to sin, sickness,
and death.
If you are timid in discussing such matters, read Venture of Faith
by Mary Alice and Harold Blake Walker. Today, because of
PMA, the family, schools, churches, press, the medical
profession, federal and state governments, and youth
organizations endeavor to lift the dark cloud of ignorance
regarding physical, mental, and social hygiene through education.
Prevention is taught as well as cure.
But a cure for alcoholism is not so easy to come by as education
in hygiene. Alcoholism ranks as the fourth largest health problem
in the nation. It follows mental and moral disease and is one of
the greatest contributors to those two diseases. The economic cost
of alcoholism is  billion dollars per year. The greater portion of
this is loss of time to industry, followed by hospital costs and
physical damages — caused mainly by automobile accidents. But


the money loss is negligible compared to the loss of physical,
mental, and moral health, and the loss of life attributable to
alcoholism.
An alcoholic has a mental illness which lies dormant until his
first drink. If he doesn't start the habit, liquor doesn't have the
power of attraction for him. If he drinks, the affinity is strong,
and he will drink to excess. If he drinks to excess, the attraction
may become irresistible, or seem so. And when he tries to resist
and doesn't succeed, he may believe he cannot be cured.
<
+ Alcohol is known to alter
the brain waves as recorded by the scientific instrument known as
an electroencephalograph. It has a most potent influence on nerve
cell metabolism which results in slow rhythms and eventual
suppression of voltage and brings about a change in the level of
consciousness.
A human body is alive only as long as its subconscious mind
functions. It can be kept alive for a long time without the
functioning of the conscious mind. There are degrees of
consciousness.
Sanity is that healthy state of mind when the activities of the
conscious and the subconscious are in proper balance. And while
they work together, each has its specific duties; each has
inhibiting factors. While sometimes it is healthful and wholesome
for a person to do the things he wants to do but which are
forbidden, judgments and actions should be the result of the
conscious and subconscious working in balance.
The intellect and other powers of the conscious mind act as a
governor regulating the subconscious when a person is in a
conscious state of activity. As the activity of this governor slows
down, the machine begins to run wild, and the individual may act


in an illogical manner. His uncontrolled activities may range from
a simple foolish act to a state of mind commonly known as
insanity.
As the inhibiting barriers are lowered, due to the effect of alcohol
on the brain cells, the restraining controls of the conscious mind
become less effective. When the emotions, passions, and other
activities of the subconscious mind have too free a rein, without
proper regulation by the balance wheel of the intellect, the
individual in this semi-conscious state of mind will commit
foolish and undesirable acts due to alcoholic influence.
Alcoholism is indeed a dread disease. If allowed to control a
person's life, it can render that person physically, mentally, and
morally ill and send him to a living hell. Once alcohol has gained
control in a person's life, it does not readily relinquish its hold.
But there is a cure!
*
;What's the cure? Stop drinking! For the
alcoholic, this is more easily said than done. The important thing
it that it can be done. He can do it!
When you develop a positive mental attitude, you don't give up
trying because you have previously failed or because you know
of cases where others have failed. You can be motivated and
receive hope from successful experiences. A baby learning to
walk isn't criticized for falling after taking the first three steps. It
is given credit for the progress it makes in response to its
conscious effort.
The alcoholic may find help in a number of places. Complete
cures for alcoholism have been effected by environmental
influences in the religious therapy of established churches; rescue
missions like the Pacific Garden Mission in Chicago; revival


meetings of evangelists like Oral Roberts; Alcoholics
Anonymous; medical and psychiatric help including hypnosis;
private hospitals such as the Keeley Institute at Dwight, Illinois;
or an inspirational book like I Dare You!
However, each individual must win his own internal victory. But,
generally, it is necessary for him to come under the environmental influence of someone who will help him through
suggestion until he takes control of his own power. Or, if you
will, until he has a positive mental attitude developed beyond the
point of relapsing into a negative mental attitude. PMA can do
wonders for the alcoholic if only he will put it to work for him.
And PMA will work wonders for you, too, in attracting health
and longevity.
Uncertainty about your health can undermine your PMA by
causing you to worry about every little ache or pain. The longer
you remain uncertain, the more your attitude changes direction
from positive to negative. And if the symptoms you have noticed
really do denote a condition that requires attention, the longer you
remain uncertain and do nothing, the greater are the opportunities
for that condition to develop. Don't be uncertain about your
health. Get into action!
+
+
; He was a young,
dynamic, successful automobile sales manager. His whole future
was ahead of him, yet he was mighty low! In fact, he expected to
die! He even selected and purchased his cemetery lot and made
all arrangements for his burial. He got his house in order. But
here's what actually happened.
At times he became short of breath. His heart beat rapidly. His
throat choked up. Eventually he went to his family doctor, who
was a very successful physician and surgeon. The doctor advised



him to take a rest, to take life easy, to retire from the work he
loved, the thrilling game of selling automobiles.
The sales manager stayed home for a while and rested his body,
but because of fears, his mind was not at ease. He still became
short of breath. His heart would beat rapidly. His throat would
choke up. It was summer-time, and his doctor advised him to
vacation in Colorado.
He was carried into the Pullman compartment. Colorado, with its
healthful climate, inspirational mountains, did not prevent the
manifestation of his fears. He would frequently experience
shortness of breath, rapid beating of the heart, and the same
choked-up feeling. Within a week he returned home. He believed
death was coming.
"Take the guesswork out of it!" this salesman was told (as you
might be told) by one of the authors. "You have everything to
gain and nothing to lose by going to a clinic such as Mayo
Brothers at Rochester, Minnesota. Do It Now!" At his request he
was driven to Rochester by a relative. He was actually afraid that
he might die en route.
When the sales manager went through the clinic, he was told
what was wrong with him. The doctor said, "Your difficulty is
that you breathe in too much oxygen." He laughed and said,
"That's silly!" The doctor responded, "Jump up and down fifty
times as if you were jumping rope." He became short of breath;
his heart beat rapidly; and his throat choked up.
"What can I do about it?" the young man asked. The doctor
responded, "When you feel this condition coming on, you can
() breathe into a paper bag, or () just hold your breath for a
little while," and the doctor banded the patient a paper bag. The
patient followed instructions. His heart stopped beating rapidly,


breathing became normal, and his throat didn't bother him. He
left the clinic a happy man.
Whenever the symptoms of his illness occurred, he would just
hold his breath for a short time, and his body would function
normally. After a few months he lost his fears, and his symptoms
disappeared. This happened more than  years ago. He hasn't
required medical attention since.
Of course, not all cures are so easily effected. There are times
when you may have to use all your resources before aid is found.
However, it is wise to continue the search with persistence and a
positive mental attitude. Such determination and optimism
usually pay off. It did for another sales manager. Let us tell you
about him.
"
This particular sales manager
registered in a small town hotel and fell and broke a leg as he
entered the room assigned to him. The hotel manager took our
sales manager to the nearest hospital where an attending
physician set his leg. A few days later it was considered safe for
him to be moved, and he returned to his home.
He convalesced for several weeks under the attention of his
family physician. But while he seemed to improve, the fracture
did not heal. After many weeks, the doctor told him that he would
get progressively worse he would become a cripple. This sales
manager was very much disturbed because his work required that
he be on his feet.
He discussed the matter with one of the authors who said, "Don't
believe it! There is always a cure — find it! Take the guesswork
out of it. Do It Now!" He was told the story of the automobile
sales manager as it has been told to you, and it was suggested that
he make arrangements to go to Mayo Brothers Clinic.


He also left the clinic a happy man. Why? He was told, "Your
system needs calcium. We could load you with it, but the calcium
would wear off. Just drink a quart of milk a day." He did. In time
the injured leg became as strong as the sound one.
A positive mental attitude applied to health takes into
consideration the possibility of accidents. In fact, Safety first is a
PMA symbol. From it you receive the suggestion to become alert
and enforce your desire to live — to save life and property.
*
A newspaper
article carried a headline reading "Late for a Funeral, Six Die in
 MPH Blowout" The lead read
!

#
#

#
#

=

Drive carefully if you want to be physically and mentally healthy,
and if you want to live longer. As a pedestrian, be alerted to the
hazards and obey traffic laws. And when you ride with another
person at the wheel of the automobile, remember you are at the
mercy of his physical and mental weaknesses, if any, as well as
the mechanical condition of his car. Have the courage to refuse to
ride with an intoxicated driver, or in an automobile in which the
brakes don't operate properly — even if you own the car. "The
life you save may be your own!"
( Although it cost one million
dollars a floor for each of its forty-one stories, the Prudential
Building in Chicago was the most inexpensive office building of
its kind ever constructed. Why?
It didn't cost a single life! There were no serious accidents. Safety
factors were installed because of PMA.


In comparison, negative mental attitudes comprising ignorance
and carelessness, caused in tragic accidents

!




"

& !






( '

 



@




#
.

!


(

 B)

#

?

!

=C
$
(
& !




!

@



. ? 

Of course, no one actually knows when tragedy will strike. But it
always is better to be prepared. You will be prepared if you have
a positive mental attitude. Aunt Kitty was.
+ ;Aunt Kitty lost her only son when he was
nine years old. Like many good housewives and mothers, she had
no business training. But Aunt Kitty did have a strong religious
faith. She knew that in spite of her great loss, it was her job to go
on living and contributing her share to make this world a better
world to live in. But how could she maintain physical and mental
health so that she could go on?


Aunt Kitty decided that in order to ease her pain and fill the great
void in her life she would have to keep very busy and do
whatever her abilities would permit to make other people happy,
since she could no longer do this for her son.
So she got a job as a waitress in a busy restaurant. Her hours were
long. Her work made it mandatory to talk with people and to act
cheerful. Faith in her religion and a sincere interest in other
people, combined with work and time, neutralized her pain and
saved her physical and mental health.
Actually, your health may be affected by many internal
influences. And some of these influences may be mental figments
of the imagination.
&
<
;Because of
the inter-relationship between the mind and body, the
subconscious mind may create apparent bodily disorders induced
by emotional disturbances to bring about a specific desired result.
A true life experience will prove the point.
A high school girl experienced severe backaches the morning of
any day on which she was to take a German or history
examination. She didn't like either subject. She wasn't properly
prepared. Her pains were so severe that she believed she couldn't
get up from bed. She was not pretending. She suffered.
A peculiar characteristic of the pain was that about  in the
afternoon, when school was over for the day, the pain would
subside. On the same evening when her boyfriend came to call,
the pain would marvelously disappear!
This girl, you probably are thinking, could do with a little
psychiatry. She could. She and many others like her have been



helped through religion and psychiatry. The two are not as far
apart as many may think. Why?
Rules and regulations for physical and
mental health and a longer life were woven into religion long
before words similar to physiology, psychology, and psychiatry
became part of any language. This is especially true regarding the
application of techniques affecting the subconscious mind.
It is easy to see why psychiatric clinics and counseling services
are becoming an integral part of church organizations regardless
of their religious denominations.
+; The Rev. Norman
Vincent Peale and Smiley Blanton, M.D., established The
American Foundation of Religion and Psychiatry, which is now
known as the Institutes of Religion and Health. It is a nonprofit,
nonsectarian clinic in New York City. Anyone with an emotional
problem is eligible for help regardless of race, religion, or ability
to pay. Today there is a full and part time professional staff of
thirtyfive composed of psychiatrists, ministers, psychologists, and
psychiatric social workers.
If you would like information on how to establish a counseling
service in your church, write the Institutes.
 Mental and physical health are two great
rewards of a positive mental attitude. It is true a positive mental
attitude takes effort, patience, and practice to gain and maintain.
But a definite purpose, clean and clear thinking, creative vision,
courageous action, persistence and true perception, all applied
with enthusiasm and faith will go far to help you achieve and
maintain a positive mental attitude.
And what lies ahead as you approach your definite goals?


Happiness lies ahead.
If you are happy now, you will wish to maintain and increase this
wonderful happiness which you already have. If you are not
happy now, you will want to learn how you can be happy. Let's
turn to  , entitled "How To Be Happy" to find
additional PMA success principles to speed us in our pursuit of
happiness.
-. '. /

. You can have more perfect health. A positive mental attitude
affects your health. It attracts good health to you. A negative
mental attitude attracts ill health.
. Thinking good thoughts, positive and cheerful thoughts, will
improve the way you feel. What affects your mind also affects
your body.
. A positive mental attitude toward the ones you love may be the
means of saving their lives. Remember the father who saved
the life of his infant son by going into action with a positive
mental attitude.
. Learn to practice PMA instead of giving in to NMA as the
engineer's wife did. Her NMA allowed death to claim her.
. Develop within you a positive mental attitude so powerful that
it seeps down from your conscious into your subconscious
mind. If you do, you will find that in times of need and emergency, it will automatically flash back to your conscious mind.
Even in the greatest emergency of life death.
. Make a study of the Bible and other inspirational books. They
will both inspire and teach you how to motivate yourself to


positive desirable action and thus help you achieve the goals
you desire.
. Learn to use the  success principles and to apply them to
your life. Have you memorized them?
. All the wealth in the world cannot, by itself, buy good health.
But you can achieve good health by striving for it and
observing simple rules of hygiene and good health habits.
Remember, John D. Rockefeller had to retire at the age of 
because of ill health, but through a positive mental attitude
and wholesome living, he reached the ripe old age of .
. PMA recognizes the importance of education in physical,
mental, and social hygiene, and that ignorance of these
subjects can mean sin, sickness, and death. Keep abreast of
current developments affecting your mental, moral, and
physical health.
. Never abandon hope — for there is a potential cure for every
ailment. Develop PMA and take the guesswork out of your
health by seeking aid at the right time.
. PMA repels accidents and tragedies by keeping the person
with PMA alert to dangers at all times. Should tragedy strike,
however, PMA can guide you in meeting reverses calmly and
deliberately.
. A sound mind and sound body are attainable if you will put
PMA to work for you. Remember — you can enjoy good
health and live longer with PMA.
I FEEL HEALTHY!
I FEEL HAPPY!
I FEEL TERRIFIC!


CHAPTER 
Can You Attract Happiness?
Can you attract happiness?
Abraham Lincoln once made the remark, "It has been my
observation that people are just about as happy as they make up
their minds to be."
There is very little difference in people, but that little difference
makes a big difference I The little difference is attitude. The big
difference is whether it is positive or negative.
Persons who want to be happy will adopt a positive mental
attitude and be influenced by the PMA side of their talisman.
Thus happiness will be attracted to them. And those who turn on
NMA make a business of being unhappy. They don't attract —
they repel happiness.
!
! A popular song starts off with words
that contain a great deal of truth "I want to be happy, but I won't
be happy, 'til I make you happy, too!"
One of the surest ways to find happiness for yourself is to devote
your energies toward making someone else happy. Happiness is
an elusive, transitory thing. And if you set out to search for it,
you will find it evasive. But if you try to bring happiness to
someone else, then it comes to you.
Writer Claire Jones, wife of a professor in the religion department
at Oklahoma City University, tells of a happiness they
experienced during their early married life. "We lived in a small
town the first two years we were married," she recalls, "and our
neighbors were a very old couple, the wife nearly blind and


confined to a wheelchair. The old man, not very well himself,
kept house and cared for her.
"My husband and I were decorating our Christmas tree a few
days before Christmas, when we decided on impulse to fix a tree
for the old people. We bought a small one, decorated it with tinsel
and lights, wrapped a few small gifts, and took it over the night
before Christmas.
"The old lady cried as she gazed dimly at the sparkling lights. Her
husband said over and over, 'But it's been years since we had a
tree.' They mentioned that tree nearly every time we visited them
during the next year.
"The next Christmas they were both gone from the little house. It
was a small thing we had done for them. But we were happy that
we'd done it."
Now the happiness they experienced as a result of their kindness
was a very deep, warm feeling the memory of which will remain
with them. It was a very special kind of happiness that comes to
those who do kind deeds.
But the kind of happiness which is most common and most
constant comes closer to being a state of contentment a state of
being neither happy nor unhappy.
You are a happy person during a period when you predominantly
experience that positive state of mind in which you are happy
combined with that neutral state of mind in which you are not
unhappy.
And you can be happy, content, or unhappy. For the choice is
yours. The determining factor is whether you are under the
influence of a positive or negative mental attitude. And that factor
you can control.


&
Surely if ever there was
a person who might have been expected to complain of
unhappiness Helen Keller was that person. Born deaf, mute, and
blind, deprived of knowledge of normal communication with the
persons who surrounded her, she had only her sense of touch to
help her to reach out to others and to experience the happiness of
loving and being loved.
But reach out she did, and through the aid of a devoted and
brilliant teacher who in love reached out to Helen Keller, that
deaf, mute, and blind little girl became a brilliant, joyful, happy
woman. Miss Keller once wrote
#
# 
?
!
!
/

'
! 
' #
!
#

!
!

!
#
'

#
'
#

!
)
!

?

'

,

#

!


#

'

!

#

=

Helen Keller counted her blessings and was profoundly grateful
for them. Then she shared the wonder of these blessings with
others, and caused them to feel delight Because she shared that
which is good and desirable, she attracted unto herself more of
that which is good and desirable. For the more you share, the
more you will have. And if you share happiness with others,
happiness will grow richer within you.



But if you share misery and unhappiness, you will attract misery
and unhappiness to yourself. And we all know of persons who are
eternally having troubles — not problems, or opportunities in
disguise. Theirs are spelled t-r-o-u-b-l-e. No matter what happens
to them, it just isn't good. And this is because they are always
sharing their troubles with others.
Now there are many lonely people in this world who long for
love and friendship but never seem to get it Some repel that
which they seek with NMA. Others curl up in their little corners
and never venture out. They secretly hope that something good
will come to them, but they do not share any of the good which
they enjoy. They do not realize that when you withhold from
others that which you have which is good and desirable, your
own portion of the good and desirable diminishes.
Others, however, have the courage to do something about their
loneliness, and they find their answer in sharing the good and
beautiful with others. There was one such little boy who was a
very lonely, unhappy little boy indeed. When he was born his
backbone was arched into a grotesque hump and his left leg was
crooked. Looking at the infant, the doctor assured the boy's
father "But he'll get along all right."
The family was poor. And the baby's mother died before he was a
year old. As he grew up, other children shunned him because of
his misshapen body and his inability to participate successfully in
many of their activities. Charles Steinmetz was his name. And he
was a lonely, unhappy little fellow.
But the Great Giver of All Good had not overlooked this little
fellow. To compensate for his misshapen body, Charles had been
endowed with an extraordinarily keen mind. Using the greatest
asset available to him, Charles ignored his physical disabilities
about which he felt he could do nothing, and worked to excel


with his mind. At five he could conjugate Latin verbs. At seven
he learned Greek and a smattering of Hebrew. At eight he had a
good understanding of algebra and geometry.
When he went on to college, he excelled in all his studies. In fact,
he was graduated with honors. He had carefully saved his pennies
so he could rent a dress suit for the occasion. But with the
inconsiderate cruelty that is so often characteristic of persons
under the influence of NMA, the school authorities posted a
notice on the bulletin board excusing Charles from the
ceremonies.
At long last it occurred to Charles that instead of trying to force
respect for himself from people by making them take notice of
his mental capacities, he would cultivate their friendship; he
would use his abilities not to attract notice and to satisfy his own
ego, but for the furtherance of the good of mankind. To start his
new way of life, he boarded a ship and came to America.
Having reached this country, Charles Steinmetz began to look for
a job. Several times he was rebuffed because of his appearance,
but he finally landed a job with General Electric as a draftsman at
$ a week. In addition to his regular duties he spent long hours
in electrical research, and he endeavored to cultivate the
friendship of his fellow employees by trying to share with them
that which he had that was good and desirable.
After some time the chairman of the board of General Electric
Company recognized the rare genius of this man, and said to
Charles "Here is our entire plant. Do anything you want with it.
Dream all day, if you wish. We'll pay you for dreaming."
Charles worked hard, long and earnestly. During Ms lifetime he
patented more than  electrical inventions and wrote many
books and papers on problems of electrical theory and


engineering. He knew the satisfaction of a job well done. And he
also knew the satisfaction of making contributions which went far
to make this world a better place to live in. He accumulated
wealth and acquired a lovely home which he shared with a young
couple he knew. Thus, Steinmetz experienced the happiness of a
full and useful life.
&
The greater part of the life of each
of us is spent in our homes, with our families. And unfortunately
that dwelling which should be a haven of love, happiness, and
security too often turns into an antagonistic place where the
members do not enjoy happy and harmonious relationships.
Problems in the home can arise for many reasons.
In one of our PMA Science of Success classes a very gifted,
aggressive young man of about twenty-four was asked, "Have
you a problem?"
"Yes!" he replied, "My mother. In fact, I have decided to leave
home this weekend."
When the student was asked to discuss his problem, it became
evident that the relationship between him and his mother was not
harmonious. It was apparent to the instructor that her aggressive,
dominant personality was similar to his.
The class was informed that the personality of an individual can
be compared to the powers of a magnet. When two like powers
are in line and push or pull in the same direction, they are drawn
to each other by attraction. When the powers are opposed to each
other, they resist and repel one another.
When they are placed side by side and both confront the same
outside forces, the individuals like the magnets remain separate



entities. Yet their strength to attract and repel these forces is
increased even though between themselves they are opposed.
The instructor continued by saying, "It appears that your behavior
and that of your mother are so similar that you can determine how
she reacts to you by the way you react to her. You can probably
evaluate her feelings by analyzing your own. Therefore, you can
solve your problem easily!
"When two forceful personalities are opposed and it is desirable
that they live together in harmony, at least one must use the
power of PMA.
"Here's your specific assignment for this week When your
mother asks you to do something, do it cheerfully. When she
expresses an opinion, agree with her in a pleasant, sincere
manner, or don't say anything. When you are tempted to find fault
with her, find something good to say. You will have a most
pleasant experience. She will probably follow your example."
"It won't work!" responded the student. "She is just too hard to
get along with!"
"You're absolutely right," responded the instructor. "It won't work
unless — you try to work it with a positive mental attitude."
A week later the young man was asked how he was coming along
with his problem. His response was "I am happy to say that there
hasn't been one unpleasant word between us all week. You might
be interested in knowing that I have decided to stay at home."
*
There is a
tendency for a person to assume that everyone always likes what
he likes and always thinks the way he thinks. For people have a
tendency to judge the reactions of others by their own reactions.


Now, like the young man who had a problem with his mother,
such a conclusion would at times be correct. But many parents
often have problems with their children because they fail to
realize that the personality of the child is different from theirs. It
is a mistake for parents not to realize that time changes both the
child and them. For they don't adjust their mental attitudes to
compensate for the changes within the child and themselves.
!
*
;!
A lawyer and his
wife had five wonderful children. The parents were unhappy
because their oldest daughter, who was a freshman at high school,
didn't respond to her parents the way they expected. The daughter
was unhappy, too.
"She's a good girl, but I don't understand her," the house; yet
she'll toil for hours at the piano. In the summer I got her a job at
the department store, but she didn't want to work. She just wants
to play the piano all day!"
It was our recommendation that the parents and daughter be given
an Activity Vector Analysis by one of the authors. In  
entitled "How to Motivate Others," you have read about Activity
Vector Analysis. These results were very revealing. We found
that the girl possessed ambitions, energies, and traits so far
beyond either of the parents that it would be difficult for them to
comprehend her reactions to them until they understood that each
person is different.
The parents thought that while it was nice to know how to play a
piano, it was good for a girl to work at home and work in a store
in the summer. A passion to be a pianist was just a waste of time.
"She will get married some day and will have to keep house. She
should be more practical," the parents reasoned.
The daughter's capacities and the tendencies that motivated her
were explained to the parents. Reasons were given why it was


hard for them to understand her. An explanation was also given to
the daughter as to why her parents thought one way and she
another. When the three endeavored to understand what brought
about their problem and how they could adjust to it with a
positive mental attitude, they were able to live together in greater
harmony.

To be happy, be
understanding of other people. Realize that another person's
energy level and capacities may not be the same as yours. He
may not think like you. Try to understand that what he likes may
not be what you like. When you realize this, you will find it
easier to develop a PMA in yourself and to do that which will
create desirable reactions in others.
Opposite poles of a magnet attract each other and do persons with
opposite personality traits. And where there is a community of
interest, two individuals may experience a happy association
together although each has opposite characteristics in many
respects. One may be ambitious, aggressive, confident, and
optimistic and possess tremendous drive, energy, and stick-toitiveness. The other may have a tendency to be satisfied, fearful,
timid, shy, tactful, and humble and may lack confidence in
himself. Often such persons are attracted to each other, and when
associated together complement, strengthen, and inspire each
other.
And they blend their personalities and thus the extremes of each
become neutralized. What would grow into rigidity on the part of
one and frustration on the part of the other is thus avoided.
Would you be happy and inspired if you were married to a person
whose personality was exactly like yours? Be truthful with
yourself. The answer would probably be "no."



Children, too, can be taught to be understanding and to be
appreciative of all that their parents do for them. Much
unhappiness is caused in homes because the children do not
appreciate and understand their parents. But whose fault is it?
The child's or the parents' or both?
Some time ago we had an appointment with the president of a
large and successful organization. His name has appeared in a
favorable light in every large newspaper in the country for the
good work he did while holding public office. Yet on the day we
saw him, he was most unhappy. "No one likes me! Even my
children hate me! Why is this?" he asked.
Actually this man is a person of good intent. He gave his children
everything that money would buy. He deliberately kept them
from the needs that forced him as a child to gain the strength he
developed as a man. He tried to protect them from those things in
life that to him were not beautiful. He eliminated the necessity for
them to struggle as he had had to struggle. He never asked or
expected appreciation from his sons and daughters when they
were children and he never got it. Yet he assumed that they
understood him without endeavoring to find out.
Things would have been different had he taught his children to be
appreciative and to gain strength by at least partially fighting their
own battles. He experienced happiness in making them happy
without teaching them to be happy by making others happy.
Therefore they made him unhappy. Perhaps if he had confided in
them when they were growing up and told of the struggles he had
endured for their benefit, they might have been more
understanding.
But there is no need for this man, or anyone in a like situation, to
remain unhappy. He can turn up the PMA side of his talisman
and try earnestly to make himself known to and understood by his
dear ones.


And he can take the time to show that he loves them by sharing
himself instead of just giving them those material things with
which his wealth can supply them. If he shares himself as
liberally as he shared his money with them, he will experience the
rich reward of having them return love and understanding to him.
Of course this man had meant well. He had the right intent
toward his children and toward others. But he had not been
sensitive to their reactions. He had simply assumed that they
would understand. And he had not taken the time to help them to
do so.
Now this man could help himself by reading inspirational books.
We recommended several including How to Win Friends and
Influence People. And we told him that his children were people.
Regardless
of who you are — you are a wonderful person! Yet certain
individuals may not think so. If you feel that they react
unfavorably with unwarranted antagonism to the many things you
say and do, you can do something about it. They are just as
human as you are.
You have the power to attract and repel! You can use this power
wisely to attract the right friends and repel those who have an
undesirable or injurious influence on you. With a negative mental
attitude — you are apt automatically to repel the good things in
life and attract the undesirable including the wrong kind of
friends.
Undesirable reactions on the part of others may be due to what
you say and how you say it; or because of your true inner feelings
and attitudes. The voice, like music, is often a reflection of the
mood, attitude, and hidden thoughts of the mind. It may be just as
difficult for you to realize that the fault lies with you as it is for


you to take the initiative and correct yourself when you realize
the fault does at times lie with you — but you can do it!
You can learn from a good salesman. For he is forced to train
himself to be sensitive to the reactions of prospective customers
— and do something about it.
The customer is always right attitude of successful merchants is a
most difficult attitude for some individuals to adopt; yet — it gets
results!
If you would endeavor to make your relatives happy with the
same positive mental attitude that a salesman uses to sell his
merchandise to prospective customers, your home and social life
would become a more happy and successful one — that is if you
have a problem of personality conflict at home.
If your feelings are frequently hurt because of what people say, or
how they say it, it is quite likely that you yourself are frequently
guilty of offending others by what you say or how you say it. Try
to determine the true reasons for your reactions of hurt feelings
and then avoid causing the same reactions in others.
If gossip offends you, you can assume that you shouldn't gossip
or you will offend others.
If you find someone's tone of voice and attitude towards you
objectionable, avoid offending others by speaking or acting in the
same manner.
If you are not happy when someone yells at you in an angry
voice, assume that it is repellent to another if you yell at him —
even though he is your five-year-old son, or a very close relative.



If you feel offended because another person misunderstands your
intent, show your confidence — give other persons the benefit
of the doubt.
If you do not find arguments, sarcasm, humor with a personal
sting, or criticism of your ideas, friends or relatives pleasant, it is
logical to assume that others will not find them pleasing either.
And if you like to be complimented — if you like to be
remembered — if it makes you happy to know that someone
thinks of you you can safely assume that others will be happy if
you compliment them, or remember them, or drop them a note to
let them know you are thinking of them.
Absence makes the heart grow
fonder — if letters are exchanged. For many a marriage has taken
place because love grew stronger through absence.
Poetry, imagination, romance, idealism, ecstasy develop warmth
and understanding through the exchange of letters. Each
individual can express thoughts that might never be expressed if
the written word is not used as the medium. Letters of
endearment need not, and should not, stop with marriage. Samuel
Clemens (Mark Twain) wrote loving notes to his wife daily even
when they were at home. They lived a life of real happiness
together.

+ To write — you must think. When you
write a letter, you crystallize your thinking on paper. Your
imagination is developed by recollecting the past, analyzing the
present and perceiving the future. The more often you write, the
more you take pleasure in writing. By asking questions, you, as
the writer, direct the mind of the recipient into desired channels.
You can make it easy for him to respond to you. Thus, when he



does, he becomes the writer and you receive additional joy as the
recipient.
The receiver of the letter you write is forced to think in terms of
you. If your letter is well-thought-out, both his reason and his
emotions can be directed along desired paths. Inspiring thoughts
will be imprinted indelibly in his memory when they are being
recorded in his subconscious mind as he reads.
Can you attract happiness? Yes, of course you can attract
happiness. How? You can attract happiness with PMA.
A positive mental attitude will attract to you all the health,
wealth, and happiness you desire. And a positive mental attitude
consists of such plus characteristics as faith, hope, charity,
optimism, cheer, generosity, tolerance, tact, kindliness, honesty,
good-finding, initiative, truthfulness, straightforwardness, and
good common sense.

As a nationally syndicated columnist, Napoleon
Hill once wrote an article entitled "Contentment." You may find
it helpful. Here is what it said
)

!

#

"



="


!#
!
#

!

!

"


=



#
!D

/
/

=
!
!

!



=

/
! ' =

! 

! 

/ !
J
/
#

/


#
#

!

!
 !

#



=

/
/
!
/
!

'


#

#

!

/

=

'
#

#

!=

! #

!

J

!
/

!
!

/
!

#

=
/

/

=% #

!/
"
!
#
!

/ !
!

!

)



/
#

/

/!
!
?

!

/ !

#

#
=

!
=


#
/ #
! # ! 
! #

=

=/
#

!
!#
!=
There are no copyrights on the Happy Valley man's success
creed. If you will adopt it, the creed can bring you wisdom,
peace, and contentment.



In his book, The Power of Faith, Rabbi Louis Bienstock said this
on the subject of happiness
"Man was born together — all of one piece. It is the kind of
world he has fashioned that has torn him apart. A world of folly!
A world of falsehood! A world of fear! With the power of faith,
let him put himself together again — faith in himself, faith in his
fellowmen, faith in his destiny, faith in his God. Then and only
then will the world be truly together. Then and only then will
man find happiness and peace."
Remember, if the man is right his world will be right, He can
attract happiness just as he can attract wealth, unhappiness, or
poverty. Is your world right? Or are guilt feelings keeping you
from winning the success you want? If so, you will want to read
our next chapter to insure happiness in your life.
-. '. /E

. Abraham Lincoln once said "It has been my observation that
people are just about as happy as they make up their minds to
be." Will you make up your mind to be happy? If not, will you
make up your mind not to be unhappy?
. There is very little difference in people, but that little
difference makes a big difference. The little difference is
attitude. The big difference is whether it is positive or
negative.
. One of the surest ways to find happiness for yourself is to
devote your energies toward making someone else happy.



. If you search for happiness, you will find it elusive. But if you
try to bring happiness to someone else, it will return to you
many times over.
. If you share happiness, and all that is good and desirable, you
will attract happiness, and the good and desirable.
. If you share misery and unhappiness, you will attract misery
and unhappiness to yourself.
. Happiness begins at home. Members of your family are
people. Motivate them to be happy just like a good salesman
motivates his prospects to buy.
. When two forceful personalities are opposed and it is desirable
that they live together in harmony, at least one must use the
power of PMA.
. Be sensitive to your own reactions and to the reactions of
others.
. Would you like to live contentedly in Happy Valley?
TO BE HAPPY
MAKE OTHERS HAPPY!



CHAPTER 
Get Rid of That Guilt Feeling
You have a guilt feeling. That's good!
But get rid of that feeling of guilt.
A sense of guilt is good. And every living person regardless of
how good or bad he may be will sometimes experience a feeling
of guilt. This feeling is the result of a "still, small voice" speaking
to you. And your conscience is that "still, small voice."
Now think for a moment What would happen if one did not feel
a sense of guilt after doing wrong? For the person who does not
have a feeling of guilt for doing a specific wrong act is often
unable to distinguish between right and wrong — or hasn't been
trained to know the difference between right and wrong as
regards that act. Or he may not be sane.
For many feelings of guilt are inherited. And others are acquired.
We know a mental conflict often will develop when inherited
emotions and passions are bridled by the society in which one
lives; and people in one environment may have an entirely
different code of ethics that is opposed to the code of those in
another. Yet in each instance where the individual has been
taught a specific, ethical standard and violates it, he develops a
feeling of guilt.
In some instances, however, the violation of a moral standard of
society is good because the standard itself may be bad.



And we reiterate a feeling of guilt is good It even motivates
persons of the highest moral standards to worthwhile thought and
action.
For there was a righteous man who hated and unrelentingly
persecuted people of a religious minority. But he developed a
feeling of guilt. And the world knows he righted his wrong when
his feelings of guilt motivated him to desirable action. For he
became a great evangelist. And his thoughts, words, and actions
have changed the history of the world during the past two
thousand years. Saul of Tarsus was his name.
And then there was a man whose feeling of guilt for what he
believed to be the misdeeds of his life made him so remorseful
that he, too, was motivated to desirable action. In prison he spent
his days writing a book. And his book is a classic reference for
teaching nobility of character and beauty of life. John Bunyan
was his name.
And then there was also the sinner we discussed in 
Fifteen who donated a half million dollars to the Chicago Boys
Clubs and who also donated a million dollars to his church. Now
he did this to atone in part for his guilt. For he provided money to
prevent boys and girls from falling into the traps and snares of
life that he had experienced.
Even a benefactor to mankind like Dr. Albert Schweitzer was
motivated by the sense of guilt. For he felt guilty that he had
fallen short of his responsibilities to his fellowmen. And because
he could, but was not, doing something worthwhile, his sense of
guilt prompted him to start his great mission.
Now do you see that a feeling of guilt with PMA is good? But
then there is a feeling of guilt with NMA. And that is bad.



For not every guilt feeling brings about beneficial remits. Now
when the individual has a guilt feeling and does not get rid of that
guilt feeling with PMA, the results are often most harmful.
And the great psychologist Sigmund Freud says "The further our
work proceeds and the deeper our knowledge of the mental life of
neurotics penetrates, the more clearly two new factors force
themselves upon our notice which demand the closest attention as
sources of resistance... They can both be included under the one
description of 'need to be ill' or 'need to suffer.'… The first of
these two factors is the sense of guilt or consciousness of guilt…"
And Sigmund Freud is right. For feelings of guilt have motivated
men to destroy their lives, mutilate their bodies, or injure
themselves in other ways to atone for their wrongdoing. Now
today, fortunately, such methods are seldom practiced. And they
are not permitted in civilized countries. Yet their counterpart can
be found. For the conscious mind may not feel guilty but the
subconscious mind does.
And the subconscious mind never forgets.
And it uses its powers as effectively as the conscious mind. For it
fulfills the need of the individual who doesn’t rid himself of the
feeling of guilt with PMA. It makes him ill. It makes him suffer.

Consideration for others is a quality each of us has to learn to
develop. The new-born babe cares little for the comfort and
convenience of anyone else. He wants what he wants when he
wants it. So right at that point in his development he begins to
learn, little by little, that there are others alive, too, and that, to
some extent at least, he will have to allow them some
consideration. But selfishness is a common human trait, and it
lessens in each of us only through development. When we get old


enough to understand that such feelings are not good, we feel a
twinge of guilt when we indulge in selfishness. This is good, for
it causes us to think twice when the occasion arises and we can
choose between pleasing ourselves or pleasing others concerned.
Thomas Gunn's six-year-old grandson was visiting him at his
home in Cleveland, Ohio. The youngster would run to the corner
every evening to meet his grandfather when he returned from
work. This made the grandfather very happy. When the youngster
met him, he would give his grandson a small bag of candy.
One day the boy ran to the corner and greeted his grandfather in
excitement and anticipation with "Where's my candy?" The
elderly gentleman tried to conceal his emotion. "Did you meet me
every evening," he hesitated before continuing, "just for a bag of
candy?" The boy was handed the small bag that his grandfather
had taken out of his pocket. Nothing more was said as they
walked to the house. The child was hurt. He was unhappy. He
didn't eat the candy. It didn't seem desirable any more. He had
injured someone whom he loved.
That night as the six-year-old and his grandfather knelt down and
said their prayers aloud together, the youngster added one all his
own "Please, God, let grandfather know I love him."
The boy's unhappiness and remorse because of what he had done
were good. Why? Because they forced him to take action to get
rid of that guilt feeling and make amends for what he had done.
 +
Feelings of guilt
can arise from many varied causes. But a sense of guilt brings
with it a feeling of indebtedness... indebtedness that must be
reduced and eliminated.



And this is very well illustrated by the story of the young doctor
in Lloyd C. Douglas' novel The Magnificent Obsession. For you
will recall that in that story the young man who is the hero felt
that he owed the world a debt because his life had been saved at
the cost of the life of a great brain surgeon who had been a real
blessing to the world.
But it was this feeling of debt which caused the young man to
become a brain specialist equal in ability to the man whose life he
felt he had taken. And from the diary of the man who had gone
on, the young man learned a philosophy of life which caused him
to develop a Magnificent Obsession. Thus, because of his guilt
feeling, he too became a worthwhile person.
Now every story is somebody's story. And every day in your
daily newspaper you read somebody's story someone like Jim
Vaus whose life was saved in more ways than one because he
responded to an irrevocable decision to get rid of his feeling of
guilt. For he got into action.

;Sometimes
people get caught in a web of wrongdoing, and they seem to be
unable to free themselves from it. For they give up trying. And
then they become more and more entangled, until finally it takes
an almost earthshaking experience to set them free. Such was the
case with Jim Vaus.
Jim Vaus is a man who literally owes his life to his decision to
say "I will" and yet this decision came quite late in life. For a
good many years, Jim had been running head on into the
Commandments. He seemed to be trying to violate them all, one
by one. The first time he broke the injunction, "Thou shalt not
steal," he was still in college. One day he stole $.; he went to
the airport, bought a ticket, and headed for Florida. A little later
he stole again, this time in an armed robbery. He was caught and


put in jail. Shortly thereafter he was granted amnesty so that he
could join the Army; yet even in the Army he got into trouble.
The court martial read, "... for diverting government property to
private use... "
And so it went. Jim Vaus' career kept sliding downhill. The more
often he did wrong, the more guilt he felt. Guilt leads to guilt, as
well as lies and deception to hide it.
Now Jim didn't consciously feel more guilty — because his
conscious sense of guilt had become deadened. But not so with
his subconscious mind. For that's where the guilt feeling
accumulated without Jim's realizing it.
And, as in the instances you often read of in your newspaper, it
took an earthshaking experience to awaken him.
Now Vaus was eventually released from the Army; he married
and moved to California where he set up an electronics consultant
business. One day a man known simply as Andy came to Jim and
outlined a big idea for beating the races with an electronic device.
Within weeks Jim was deeply involved with the underworld. And
he was driving a nine thousand dollar car. He had a fine home in
the suburbs, and more business than he could handle.
One day Jim had an argument with his wife. She wanted to know
where all the money was coming from, and he wouldn't say. So
she started to cry. Jim couldn't stand to see his wife cry. For he
loved her. Jim's conscience bothered him. Because he wanted to
humor her, he suggested a ride out to the beach. On the way, they
got caught in a traffic jam hundreds of cars were pouring into a
parking lot.
"Oh look, Jim," said Alice. "It's Billy Graham! Let's go. It might
be interesting."


And still trying to humor her, Jim went along. But shortly after he
sat down he became emotionally disturbed It seemed to him that
Graham was talking directly to him. For Jim's conscience
bothered him so badly that it seemed he had been singled out.
Graham's text was
"What does it profit a man if he gains the whole world and loses
his soul?"
Then Graham was saying
"There's a man here who has heard all this before, who is
hardening his heart. With pride he stiffens his neck, and he is
determined to leave without making a decision. But this will be
his last chance."
His last chance? To Jim the thought was startling. Perhaps he had
a premonition. Or perhaps he was ready. What did the preacher
mean?
Graham was giving a call to come forward. He wanted people to
take a physical step that symbolized a decision. What was
happening, Jim wondered. Why did he feel like crying? Suddenly
he found himself speaking. "Let's go, Alice." Dutifully Alice
walked to the aisle, and turned as if to go out of the tent. Jim,
who was following her, caught her arm and turned her around.
"No, dear," he said. "This way… "
Years later, after Jim had changed his life completely, he was
giving a speech in Los Angeles. And then he told of his
experiences with the underworld. He told about the day of his
decision, on which day he had been instructed to fly to St. Louis
on a wire-tapping assignment. "I never reached St. Louis," he
said. "I found the courage to reach my knees instead."


And in his speech Jim told of his blessings and how he had
thanked God for them, asked for forgiveness, had tried to
neutralize his wrongdoing, and stressed the application of the
Golden Rule.
After the lecture, a lady came up to him and said, "Mr. Vaus, I
think you might like to know something. I was working in the
Mayor's office at the time you were supposed to go to St. Louis.
On that day a teletype was received from the FBI. It said, Mr.
Vaus, that you were going to be met in St. Louis by a rival gang.
And shot dead."
Your own
"last chance" may not be as dramatic as this. But there is a
wonderful lesson in the story of Jim Vaus, nonetheless. How was
Jim able to get rid of his guilt feelings? He did it by following a
clearcut pattern. It is the pattern all of us can follow.
L


!


=

L )
!= 



!
!

=


)

! '
#

'

'


L-



!

#
#
=

=
'

'
!

#

=)
=

 #
!
=

! '



!
I! # '
!
#
#

L


!
# D

L

! ' !
!!
!

@
!
=

=)
#
#

'
#

!

D
=
!



=

##
# #
= 
#
=
#
#



=.
! '

#
#

=

So this is the formula for getting rid of your guilt feelings. If you
are having trouble with temptation, and if subsequent guilt is
keeping you from using your energy in a constructive direction,
learn the pattern for freedom from guilt Relate it to your own life.
Apply it. And step away toward success.
Success Through a Positive Mental Attitude urges you to use the
powers of your conscious and subconscious mind to
'

=

%


'


=
#

"
? =

!
=
#

!

=

#

!#

#
#

#

#
=

Anything which deters you from noble achievements in life
should be cast aside. And this places upon you the burden to
know or find out what is right or wrong, and to know what is
good or evil under a given circumstance and at a given time.



You are acquainted with the Ten Commandments, the Golden
Rule, and other standards of good in the society in which you
live. And it is for you to determine the standards which will guide
you to your desired goals.
"It is one thing to know the goal, and quite another thing to work
toward it," writes Bishop Fulton J. Sheen in Life Is Worth Living.
Choose your goals! Work toward them! Direct your thoughts,
control your emotions, get into action and you ordain your
destiny. You can find the answer if you keep seeking it. How?
One important aid is to "catch character."

"Character is something that is caught, not taught," was a
thought-provoking quotation of Arthur Burger, former Executive
Director of the Boys Clubs of Boston. It appeared in a Reader's
Digest article entitled ", Boys Are Members of the Club."
Catch has two distinct meanings () "affected by exposure to
environment" (often subconscious reaction); and () "seize and
hold" (conscious action).
One effective way to catch character is to place yourself or your
children in an environment that will develop desirable thoughts,
motives, and habits. If your selected environment it is not
sufficiently effective after a reasonable time, make substitutions
and changes.
But character can also be taught. And if parents would devote
more time to teaching character, both by precept and example,
their children would catch and learn this admirable quality so
necessary for success.
+
%
 E. E. Bauermeister, former
Supervisor of Education at the California Institution for Men at
Chino, California, says "Our youngsters need the guidance in


choosing right from wrong which they should receive at home…
when we start talking about juvenile delinquency, we should
rename it and put the responsibility where it belongs. We have a
case of parent delinquency in America today. Parents are not
assuming the obligations and responsibilities that are theirs.
"Everyone has been born with a potential of good character… "
J. Edgar Hoover made this statement "You can read volumes
upon volumes as to the cause of crime, but crime is literally
caused by the lack of one thing, a feeling of moral responsibility
on the part of people."
And the reason the people lack a feeling of moral responsibility is
because they lack a guilt feeling. Thus they do not develop their
own characters, for their conscience is dulled and doesn't guide
them. And from their faulty unmoral and amoral characters their
children can neither catch nor learn character.
= Sometimes it is not
so easy to decide whether one should say yes or no. For the
question to be resolved may involve a conflict between virtues.
And every person at some time is faced with such a conflict and
must make a decision. He must choose between what he wishes
to do and what he ought to do; or between what he wants and
what society expects of him.
And such a choice must necessarily be made between virtues,
such as love, duty, and loyalty. As examples (a) love and duty to
a parent in conflict with the love and duty to a husband or wife;
(b) loyalty to an individual in conflict with loyalty to another
individual; or (c) loyalty to an individual in conflict with loyalty
to an organization or society.



Let's Illustrate with the story of the salesmen who worked with
George Johnson. For they were faced with a conflict between
loyalty to an individual and loyalty to another Individual and the
organization he represented.
George Johnson trained, encouraged, inspired, and financed a
salesman whom we will call John Black.
George had complete confidence in John. He liked him. He gave
him a break. He let him service his best customers — long
established accounts. In the company contract it was agreed that
in the event of termination the salesman would in no way molest
the company's business or interfere with its sales organization.
Mr. Johnson gave Black the book Think and Grow Rich. It
motivated John to action — the wrong action! John didn't read
what was unwritten. His only interest was the acquisition of
money. He believed the end justified any means. Because of his
negative standards he responded aggressively with a negative
mental attitude.
"George Johnson is just like a father to me. Yes, I think of him as
a father," the salesman said, but at the same time he secretly
planned to transfer the company's customers and sales force to a
competing concern for — money.
John was welcomed in the homes of his fellow salesmen. For
they were unaware of his thoughts or plans. When he called at
their homes he relied upon the honesty and decency of the
individuals to live up to a promise and not to betray his secret. He
would ask, "How would you like to double your earnings? How
would you like to have greater security?" The response would be
"Sounds good! What's it all about?"



Black would answer, "I don't want anyone to upset the apple cart;
therefore, I'll tell you only if you promise me on your honor not to
tell anyone. Do you make a solemn promise?"
When the answer was yes, he endeavored to entice them over to
the competing organization. He tried to neutralize their pangs of
conscience by referring to real or imaginary dissatisfactions.
The other salesmen were "on the spot." On the one hand, they had
given John their solemn promise not to tell what he was doing.
On the other hand, they knew what he was doing would be
harmful to their employer. And they owed a greater loyalty to
George Johnson and the organization he represented.
The salesmen had the courage to try to clear the cobwebs of
John's thinking and to show him that what he was contemplating
was not right. When he didn't respond but persisted in his own
way, they knew what to do They gave George Johnson the facts.
They chose adherence to courage, honesty, and loyalty. They
knew how to decide between right and wrong when one virtue
was in conflict with another.
There are many such conflicts. In your life you will be faced with
the necessity to make decisions in instances where virtues are in
conflict with other virtues. And what will your decision be?
Perhaps the following will aid you
Do that which your conscience tells you will not develop a guilt
feeling. It's the right thing to do. To assist you in coming to the
right decision under such circumstances, complete the Success
Quotient Analysis in the following chapter.
-. '. /F



. You have a guilt feeling. That's good! But get rid of that guilt
feeling!
. To get rid of that guilt feeling, make amends.
. A recommended formula to help you get rid of guilt is
(a) Listen to advice, a lecture, sermon, etc., and relate and
assimilate the principles.
(b) Count your blessings and thank God for them.
(c) Then become truly sorry for your wrongdoings. True
sorrow necessarily incorporates a sincere decision to stop
the wrongdoing.
(d) Take the first step forward Acknowledge your
and your intention to make amends.

guilt

(e) Make amends insofar as you are able.
(f) Memorize, understand and try to apply the Golden Rule
in your dealings with others.
. Anything which deters you from noble achievements in life
should be cast aside.
. Character can be caught and taught.
. What do you do when two virtues are in conflict with one
another?
. The burden is upon you to find what is right or wrong, and to
know what is good or evil under a given circumstance and at a
given time. One of the best ways to learn is to expose yourself
with regularity to a religious environment, and to seek Divine
Guidance daily.
YOU HAVE A GUILT FEELING — THAT’S GOOD.
BUT GET RID OF THAT GUILT FEELING!



;
'$#- #$'$
Remember that you and you alone can eliminate your real
limitations when you learn and employ the art of motivation with
PMA. These limitations are
. A negative mental attitude and your neglect to change to a
positive mental attitude
. Ignorance, through your neglect, to learn how to use the
powers of your mind
. Your neglect to engage in thinking, study and planning time to
set and achieve desirable goals
. Your neglect to take the necessary action when you know what
to do and how to do it
. Your neglect to learn how to recognize, relate, assimilate and
apply universal principles that, when applied, can help you
achieve any objective you may have that doesn't violate the
laws of God or the rights of your fellow men
. That which you set up in your own mind, or accept, as
insurmountable
Also remember Negligence is one of the quickest and easiest
habits to neutralize and overcome if you want to neutralize and
overcome it.



CHAPTER 
Now It's Time to Test Your Own Success Quotient
You have read all but the last three chapters of Success Through a
Positive Mental Attitude. And now would be a good time to take
a look at your own mental attitude. And you can do this for
yourself.
But before you do, we want you to know our attitude is
The burden of teaching is upon the person who wants to teach.
And with whom does the burden of learning lie? Perhaps J.
Milburn Smith has the answer. Now J. Milburn Smith rose from
assistant to the office boy to president of the Continental Casualty
Company of Chicago. He told us
The burden of learning is on the person who wants to learn, not
on the person who wants to teach. And he also said
"A 'have-not' is a person who believes that an idea is not good for
him unless he himself originates it. And I say
"Copy from success! Everything I have done I have borrowed
from another person or business." And he continued
"Be respectful and listen to those who have experience.
"For the experienced man had something I wanted. And that's
why I associated with older and successful men. For I took what
they had the good, their knowledge and experience, but not their
weaknesses. And then I added this to what I had. Thus I profited
even by their mistakes as well as my own.



To learn one must pay the price. And I was willing to pay it for I
was not taught. I learned. Knowledge? You must seek it out!"
Copy from success, says J. Milburn Smith.
And you can begin by asking yourself some questions Am I
willing to pay the price? Am I willing to take the good, the
knowledge and the experience, but not the weaknesses of the men
I have read about in this book?
And if your answer is yes, then we have a suggestion that we
know will help you. But let's first remind you that as you have
read the pages of this book, you have frequently been called upon
to answer questions about yourself. And although these may have
appeared to have been simple questions, in reality is there
anything harder than to evaluate one's self correctly? "Know
thyself" is probably the most difficult admonition ever given to
man.
And to assist you to know thyself the authors have prepared a
personal analysis questionnaire which has helped many men and
women to do this more satisfactorily. You have already taken
many tests intelligence, aptitude, personality, vocabulary, and all
the rest.
But this one is different. We call it your Success Quotient
Analysis. And it is based on the  success principles which have
been responsible for the worthwhile achievements of the world's
outstanding leaders in all fields. It has many purposes
)
)
)
)

=


#

' =
=
#



#

=

)

!
=

)
) !

!

=
#

.% =

.
And now our suggestion is that you
immediately try to answer the following Success Quotient
Analysis thoughtfully and truthfully, to the best of your ability.
Try not to fool yourself. For this test will be valid only if you
answer every question with the truth as you now see it.
G
. Definiteness of purpose

Yes

No

(a) Have you decided upon a definite major _______ _______
goal in life?
(b) Have you set a time limit for reaching
that goal?

_______

_______

(c) Do you have specific plans for
achieving your goal in life?

_______

_______

(d) Have you determined what definite
benefits your goal in life will bring you?

_______

_______

Yes

No

. Positive mental attitude
(a) Do you know what is meant by a
positive mental attitude?

_______ _______

(b) Do you control your mental attitude?

_______ _______

(c) Do you know the only thing over which

_______ _______



anyone has complete power of control?
(d) Do you know how to detect a negative
mental attitude in yourself and others?

_______ _______

(e) Do you know how to make PMA a
habit?

_______ _______

. Going the "Extra Mile"

Yes

No

(a) Do you make a habit of rendering more
and better service than you are paid for?

_______ _______

(b) Do you know when an employee is
entitled to more pay?

_______ _______

(c) Do you know of anyone who has
achieved success in any calling without
doing more than he was paid to do?

_______ _______

(d) Do you believe anyone has a right to
expect an increase in salary unless he is
doing more than he is paid for?

_______ _______

(e) If you were your own employer, would _______ _______
you be satisfied with the sort of service you
are now rendering as an employee?
. Accurate thinking

Yes

No

(a) Do you make it your duty constantly to _______ _______
learn more about your occupation?
(b) Is it your habit to express "opinions" on
subjects with which you are not familiar?


_______ _______

(c) Do you know how to find the facts
when you need knowledge?
_______ _______
. Self-discipline

Yes

(a) Do you hold your tongue when angry?

No

_______ _______

(b) Is it your habit to speak before you _______ _______
think?
(c) Do you lose your patience easily?

_______ _______

(d) Are you generally even-tempered?

_______ _______

(e) Is it your habit to allow your emotions _______ _______
to overpower your reason?

. The master mind

Yes

No

(a) Are you influencing other people to help _______ _______
you attain your goal in life?
(b) Do you believe that a person can
succeed in life without the aid of others?

_______ _______

(c) Do you believe a man can easily
_______ _______
succeed in his occupation if he is opposed
by his wife or other members of his family?
(d) Are there advantages when an employer _______ _______
and an employee work together in
harmony?

(e) Are you proud when a group to which
you belong is praised?


_______ _______

. Applied faith

Yes

No

(a) Do you have faith in Infinite
Intelligence?

_______ _______

(b) Are you a person of integrity?

_______ _______

(c) Do you have confidence in your ability _______ _______
to do what you decide to do?
(d) Are you reasonably free from these
seven basic fears () fear of poverty? ()
fear of criticism? () fear of ill health?
() fear of loss of love? () fear of loss
of liberty? () fear of old age? () fear
of death?
. Pleasing personality

_______ _______

Yes

(a) Are your habits offensive to others?

No

_______ _______

(b) Is it your habit to apply the Golden _______ _______
Rule?
(c) Are you liked by those with whom you _______ _______
work?

(d) Do you bore others?

_______

___

. Personal initiative

Yes

No

(a) Do you plan your work?

_______ _______

(b) Must your work be planned for you?

_______ _______



(c) Do you possess outstanding qualities
not possessed by others in your line of _______
work?

______

(d) Is it your habit to procrastinate?

_______

______

(e) Is it your habit to try to create better
plans for doing your work more
efficiently?

_______

______

Yes

No

(a) Are you an enthusiastic person?

_______

______

(b) Do you direct your enthusiasm toward
carrying out your plans?

_______

______

(c) Does your enthusiasm overpower your
judgment?

_______

______

Yes

No

(a) Is it your habit to concentrate your
thoughts on what you are doing?

_______

______

(b) Are you easily influenced to change
your plans or your decisions?

_______

______

(c) Are you inclined to abandon your aims
and plans when you meet opposition?

_______

______

(d) Do you keep working regardless of
unavoidable distractions?

_______

______

Yes

No

. Enthusiasm

. Controlled attention

. Teamwork


(a) Do you get along harmoniously with
others?

_______ ______

(b) Do you grant favors as freely as you
ask them?

_______ ______

(c) Do you have frequent disagreements
with others?

_______ ______

(d) Are there great advantages in friendly
cooperation among co-workers?

_______ ______

(e) Are you aware of the damage one can
cause by not cooperating with co-workers?

_______ ______

. Learning from defeat

Yes

No

(a) Does defeat cause you to stop trying?

_______ _______

(b) If you fail in a given effort, do you keep
trying?

_______ _______

(c) Is temporary defeat the same as failure?

_______ _______

(d) Have you learned any lessons from
defeat?

_______ _______

(e) Do you know how defeat can be
converted into an asset that will lead to
success?

_______ _______

Yes

. Creative vision
(a) Do you use your imagination
constructively?


No

_______ _______

(b) Do you make your own decisions?

_______ _______

(c) Is the man who only follows
instructions always worth more than the
man who also creates new ideas?

_______ _______

(d) Are you inventive?

_______ _______

(e) Do you create practical ideas in
connection with your work?

_______ _______

(f) When desirable, do you seek sound
advice?

_______ _______

. Budgeting time and money

Yes

No

(a) Do you save a fixed percentage of your
income?

_______ _______

(b) Do you spend money without regard to
your future source of income?

_______ _______

(c) Do you get sufficient sleep each night?

_______ _______

(d) Is it your habit to employ spare time
studying self-improvement books?

_______ _______

. Maintenance of sound health

_______ _______

(a) Do you know five essential factors of
sound health?

_______ _______

(b) Do you know where sound health
begins?

_______ _______



(c) Are you aware of the relation of
relaxation to sound health?

_______ _______

(d) Do you know the four important
factors necessary for the proper
balancing of sound health?

_______ _______

(e) Do you know the meaning of
"hypochondria" and "psychosomatic
illness"?

_______ _______

. Using cosmic habit force as it pertains
to your personal habits

Yes

No

(a) Do you have habits which you feel you
cannot control?

_______ _______

(b) Have you recently eliminated
undesirable habits?

_______ _______

(c) Have you recently developed any
new, desirable habits?

_______ _______

Here's how to rate your answers. All the following questions
should have been answered NO c - d - b - b -c - e - b c - a - d - b - d – c - b - c -c - a - c - c b - a. All other questions should have been answered YES.
Your score would have been  if all the questions had been
answered "No" or "Yes" as shown above. This is a perfect score
and very few people have ever made such a score. Now let's see
what your score was.



Number of "No" answers instead of "Yes" _______X =______
If you answered "No" to any of the meaning questions that should
have been answered "Yes," deduct four points for each one
Add the subtotals together, and subtract from . This will be
your score.
Illustration
Number of "Yes" answers instead of "No"  x  =
Number of "No" answers instead of "Yes"  x  =



--------

Total Number of Wrong Answers--------------------- 
=====

Perfect Score -------------------------------------------- 
Minus Total Number of Wrong Answers ----------- - 
---------

Your Score ----------------------------------------------- 
======

Find your rating below
 points ———— Perfect (Very Rare)
 to  points ———— Good (Above Average)
 to  points ———— Fair (Average)
 to  points ———— Poor (Below Average)
Below  points ———— Unsatisfactory
You have now taken an important step to success and happiness.
You have tried to answer the questions in this Success Quotient
Analysis searchingly and honestly. If not, you will. Now the
important thing to remember is that these results are not final and
unchangeable. If you scored high, it means you will be able to
assimilate and practice the principles in this book rather quickly.



If your score was not so high don't despair! Apply PMA! You
can achieve great success in life!
When you need help from a psychologist to find out what
business or profession you may be fitted for, he will frequently
ask you to take a battery of tests.
The picture that emerges from these tests may show you what
your particular tendencies are. However, the psychologist does
not regard the result of these tests as final. He always arranges for
a personal interview to find out that which a test will not answer.
He uses the results of the tests and the interview to counsel you
and to evaluate your progress.
In the same way you can use the first score on the questionnaire
as a means of measuring your own ever-growing successquotient.
Read Success Through a Positive Mental Attitude from cover to
cover once more. And again. And again. Read it aloud with your
husband, wife, or a close friend, discussing it point by point.
Read it until every principle becomes a part of your life,
motivating your every action.
Then, when you have earnestly applied these principles for three
months, take the S.Q. test again. Not only will many wrong
answers become right ones, but answers you gave correctly the
first time will be more emphatic and confident.
Your Success Quotient can serve you as more than a yardstick,
however. It can serve to underline those areas where you need to
work hardest for self-improvement. It will also reveal your areas
of special strength.



For your future is ahead of you. You have the power to direct
your thoughts and control your emotions. Just awaken the
sleeping giant within you.
How?
You will find your answer in the next chapter.
-. '. @

. Review the Success Quotient Analysis frequently until you can
truthfully state to yourself "I can now make the right answer to
each question." Each of the questions will direct your mind in a
specific channel whereby you can easily determine what you can
and should do.
. There is a value in solving problems or developing desirable
habits by asking yourself the proper questions. Write them down,
and then, in your thinking time, strive to find the proper solutions
to obtain the results you desire.
SOW AN ACT AND YOU REAP A HABIT.
SOW A HABIT AND YOU REAP A CHARACTER.
SOW A CHARACTER AND YOU REAP A DESTINY.



CHAPTER 
Awaken the Sleeping Giant
Within You
You are the most important living person.
"Stop and think about yourself In all the history of the world
there was never anyone else exactly like you, and in all the
infinity of time to come, there will never be another."
You are the product of your heredity, environment, physical
body, conscious and subconscious mind, experience, and
particular position and direction in time and space... and
something more, including powers known and unknown.
You have the power to affect, use, control or harmonize with all
of them. And you can direct your thoughts, control your emotions
and ordain your destiny with PMA.
For you are a mind with a body.
And your mind consists of dual, invisible gigantic powers the
conscious and subconscious. One is a giant that never sleeps. It is
called the subconscious mind. The other is a giant which when
asleep is powerless. When awakened, his potential power is
unlimited. This giant is known as the conscious mind. When the
two work in harmony, they can affect, use, control or harmonize
with all known and unknown powers.
"What wouldst thou have? I am ready
to obey thee as thy slave — I and the other slaves of the lamp,"
said the genie.



Awaken the sleeping giant within you! It is more powerful than
all the genii of Aladdin's lamp! The genii are fictional. Your
sleeping giant is real!
What wouldst thou have? Love? Good health? Success? Friends?
Money? A home? A car? Recognition? Peace of mind? Courage?
Happiness? Or, would you make your world a better world in
which to live? The sleeping giant within you has the power to
bring your wishes into reality.
What wouldst thou have? Name it and it's yours. Awaken the
sleeping giant within you! How?
Think. Think with a positive mental attitude.
Now the sleeping giant, like the genie, must be summoned with
magic. But you possess this magic. The magic is your talisman,
with the symbols PMA on one side and NMA on the other. The
characteristics of PMA are the plus characteristics symbolized by
such words as faith, hope, honesty, and love.

D
We have called the
resumes at the end of the chapters "pilots." That is because you
are going somewhere. You are not standing still. You are on your
way through rough and often unfamiliar waters. To reach the end
of your journey successfully, you will need many of the skills of
the navigator. As the compass of a ship is affected by disturbing
magnetic influences, requiring the pilot to make certain
allowances in order to keep the vessel on its right course, so you
must take account of the powerful influences affecting you as you
navigate through life.
A compass is corrected to give true readings regardless of
variation and deviation. The same applies to life where the
variations are environmental influences. And the deviations are


the negative attitudes within your own conscious and
subconscious mind. You must correct these deviations as they
occur in your plotting.
Ahead of you may be disappointments, adversities, and dangers.
These are the rocks and hidden shoals past which you must sail
on your course. And this you can do when your compass is
compensated for variation. For if you are aware of the coral reefs
and tides, you can capitalize on each. You can select the
environmental influence of the light of a lighthouse or sound of a
buoy to steer a course that will bring you towards your
destination without serious mishap.
Now when plotting a course, you must rely upon the accuracy of
your compass. Compensating the compass is not an exact science.
A necessary safeguard is unceasing watchfulness on the
navigator's part. It is possible, however, to correct a compass very
effectively.
Just as a magnetic needle is in direct line with the north and south
magnetic poles, so when your compass is compensated, you will
automatically react in line with your objective, your highest ideal.
And the highest ideal of man is the will of God.
+
D
Success Through a Positive Mental Attitude will bring you
success, wealth, physical, mental and spiritual health, and
happiness when — you react favorably to it. Remember what
Andrew Carnegie said
"Anything in life worth having is worth working for." Awaken the
sleeping giant! In the next chapter entitled "The Amazing Power
of a Bibliography" you will discover the art of reading an
inspirational book in a manner that will help you to awaken the
sleeping giant within you.



. What wouldst thou have? Love? Good health? Success?
Friends? Money? A home? A car? Recognition? Peace of mind?
Courage? Happiness? Or would you make your world a better
world in which to live?
. Name it and it can be yours — if you learn and employ the
principles found in this book that are applicable to you.
. Think. Think with a positive mental attitude. And follow
through with desirable action.
. Compensate your compass to avoid dangers and thus arrive
safely at your chosen destination.
. The highest ideal of man is the will of God.
. Awaken the sleeping giant within you!

AWAKEN THE SLEEPING GIANT
WITHIN YOU!





condition his or her mind to receive it. Just
as one must master the fundamentals of
elementary mathematics before going on
to higher mathematics, so must one
acquire

the

knowledge

of

mind-

conditioning step by step, by studying the
important subjects which are related to this
knowledge, as set forth in the chapters
which follow.
By patiently and thoughtfully following me
through the pages of this volume, you may
find a new world of riches you did not know
you possessed. I shall describe, in plain
language anyone can understand, the
formula which helped me convert dental
surgery into a magnificent interlude entirely
free from pain.
But that is only the starter!

The system of mind-conditioning I shall
reveal in this book will aid one in mastering
many circumstances of life he does not
desire, such as physical pain, sorrow, fear,
and despair. It will also prepare him to
acquire the things which are desired, such
as peace of mind, self-understanding,
financial prosperity and harmony in all
human relations.
This volume is far and away the most
revealing, in terms of utter frankness, of
many subjects which I have left out of my
previous books, because I desired to
present them under the auspices of
dentists and physicians whose patients
need most of the information they convey.
In my previous books I have shown how to
make one’s job, profession, or business

pay off in profitable terms, and it has been
estimated that my books have helped
millions of people become financially
prosperous. In this volume I have aimed to
help people make LIFE pay off in terms of
their own choice, through a system of selfdiscipline

which

has

the

astounding

advantage of being subject to proof of its
soundness by every reader of this volume.
Lastly, I have written this book for people
who have personal problems they have not
solved and unpleasant circumstances they
must master, with the hope that it will be of
great benefit to every person who reads it
and reflect credit on my physician and
dentist friends who may recommend it to
their patients.

At the beginning I only planned to write a
book which would help people condition
their minds for dentistry or surgery, but as I
began to outline the skeleton of the book’s
contents, I envisioned a much greater
purpose than the original – a purpose
which would give the reader the full benefit
of more than forty years of research into the
causes of both success and failure,
happiness

and

misery;

important

knowledge I accumulated while organizing
the Science of Success, which now
appears under many different titles, with a
reader following throughout most of the
world.
In the chapters which follow I shall
introduce some of the great miracles of life
through which my readers may discover
and appropriate the Twelve Great Riches

described in a subsequent chapter. I shall
also reveal the means by which fear,
poverty, sorrow, failure, and physical pain
may be transmuted into inspirational forces
of great benefit.
Read with an open mind the chapters
which follow and you shall have revealed to
you the greatest of all miracles – one that I
cannot describe because it is known only
to you, and it is entirely under your control!
This miracle is one which contains a
password capable of making you free and
helping you appropriate al of the Twelve
Great Riches of Life. It can bring you peace
of mind and give you a well-balanced life,
consisting of every circumstance and every
material thin you need or desire.

In this volume, I have given you, through
the description of the miracles, one half of
the password; but the other half is in your
possession and must be added to the half I
have provided. As you read these chapters,
the half in your possession will be revealed
to you. And when you recognize it,
appropriate it, and begin to transmute it into
a full life of your making. You will
understand that this volume has given you
something much more important than the
way to remove the fear of physical pain
from dentistry or surgery.
And having thus become the master of a
few simple things, you shall become also
the master of still greater things.
Napoleon Hill

  Everyone Can Perform
“Miracles”
An expectant father was pacing up and
down the hall in front of the operating room
at the hospital, waiting to hear whether it
was a boy or a girl.
The door opened, two nurses came out and
passed by the waiting father without
looking in his direction. Then the doctor
came to the door, hesitated a moment, and
motioned the impatient father to enter.
“Before you go in,” the doctor began, “I
must prepare you for a shock. It’s a boy and
he was born without ears. He hasn’t the
slightest sign of ears, and of course he will
be deaf all his life.”

“He may have been born without ears,” the
father exclaimed, “but he will not go
through life deaf!”
“Now don’t become excited,” returned the
doctor. “But you may as well prepare
yourself to accept the conditions as they
are; not as you wish them to be. Medical
science has known of other cases like that
of your son, but not one of the children born
in his condition ever learned to hear.”
“Doctor, I have great respect for your skill
as a physician, but I am also a doctor in a
certain sense, for I have discovered a
powerful remedy sufficient for human
needs in practically every circumstance.
The first step one must take in applying this
remedy is to refuse to accept as inevitable
any circumstance one does not desire, and

I am notifying you, here and now, that I
shall never accept my son’s affliction as
something which cannot be corrected.”
The doctor made no reply, but the look of
astonishment on his face clearly said, “You
poor fellow, I feel sorry for you, but you’ll
find out there are some circumstances of
life which one is forced to accept.” He took
the father by the arm and walked into the
room where the mother and child awaited
him, turned back the spread and stood
silently while the father looked at what the
doctor sincerely believed to be one of those
“circumstances of life which one is forced
to accept.”
Time moved onward rapidly. Twenty-five
years

later

another

doctor

smilingly

emerged from his laboratory with some X-

rays

in his

hands.

“Miraculous,” he

exclaimed, “I have X-rayed this young
man’s head from every possible angle and
I see no evidence that he possesses any
form of hearing equipment. Yet my tests
show that he has sixty-five percent of his
normal hearing capacity.”
The doctor was a well-known ear specialist
of New York City, and the X-rays he held in
his hands were made of the head of the
young man who doubtless would have
gone through life deaf had it not been for
the intervention of a father who refused to
accept

that

condition

and

who

did

something to cause nature to correct it.
I can vouch for the correctness of these
statements because I am the father who
refused to accept as incurable even so

great an affliction as that of being born
without ears.
For almost nine years I devoted a major
portion of my time to the application of a
power which finally restored my son sixtyfive percent of his normal hearing. It was
sufficient to enable him to go through the
grade school, high school, and college with
grades that equal ed the best of students.
And it was sufficient to enable him to adjust
himself to life so as to live normally and
without inconveniences or embarrassment
such as most deaf persons suffer.
How as this “miracle” performed?
Who or what did the performing, and what
took place inside the head of the child born
without ears which enable him to develop

sufficient hearing capacity to carry him
through life satisfactorily?
These same questions were put to the ear
specialist. Here is his reply “Without doubt,
the psychological directives the father gave
through the child’s subconscious mind
influenced nature to improvise some sort of
a nerve system which connected the brain
with the inner walls of the skull and enabled
the boy to hear by what is now known as
bone conduction.”
It is hoped that by the time the reader shall
have finished reading this volume the exact
nature of the “miracle” which saved a child
from going through life as a deaf person will
be revealed. That is the major purpose in
writing the book.

The author has been aided by this “miracle”
ever since he first became conscious of it,
when he was quite a young man. It has
helped him to master fear, superstition,
ignorance, and poverty, the four enemies of
mankind to which so many people yield
without a fight because they do not
understand how to apply the “miracle” in
refusing to accept from Life that which they
do not want.
The exact nature of the “miracle” is
something one person cannot describe to
another until that person has been mentally
conditioned to received it. For this reason,
it may be necessary for the reader to read
and analyze al of the subsequent chapters
of this book before he is conditioned to
receive the full meaning of the “miracle.”

Some very definite clues have been
described in this chapter, but they may not
be sufficient to reveal the supreme secret
by which one may successful y reject from
Life that which one does not desire.
This secret is worthy of earnest search
because it is the master key that will unlock
the doors to multiple blessings for all who
possess it, including the mastery of dread
of dental and medical surgery.
The mental attitude in which you read this
book will determine, to a large extent, the
time and the place in the book where the
secret may be revealed to you. Therefore,
let us turn our attention to some of the
profound

potentials

MENTAL ATTITUDE.

of

a

POSITIVE

If you have your mental attitude under
control, you may control almost all other
circumstances which affect your life,
including your fears and worries of every
nature whatsoever.
How Important Is Mental Attitude?
Let us analyze the part mental attitude
plays in our lives and we shall learn how
important it is.
Your mental attitude is the major factor
which attracts people to you in a spirit of
friendliness, or repels them, according to
whether

your

attitude

is

positive

or

negative; and you are the only person who
can determine which it shall be.
Mental attitude is an important factor in the
maintenance of sound physical health. All

doctors know, and most of them will admit,
that the patient’s mental attitude is more
important in curing physical ailments than
any other single factor.
Mental attitude is a determining factor –
perhaps the most important factor – as to
what results one gets from prayer. It has
long been known that when one goes to
prayer in a mental attitude swayed by fear,
doubt, and anxiety, only negative results
are experienced. Only the prayers which
are backed by a mental attitude of profound
FAITH can be expected to bring positive
results.
Your mental attitude while driving an
automobile

on

the

public

highway

determines very largely whether you are a
safe driver or a traffic hazard endangering

your own life and the lives of others. Most
automobile accidents are said to happen
because of drunken driving, or anger, or
some form of overanxiety or worry on the
part of the drivers.
Your mental attitude determines, to a large
extent, whether you find peace of mind or
go through life in a state of frustration and
misery.
Mental attitude is the warp and the woof of
all salesmanship, regardless of what one is
selling – merchandise, personal services,
or any commodity. A person with a
negative mental attitude can sell nothing.
He may take an order from someone who
buys something from him, but no selling
was done. The transaction was entirely on
of buying. Perhaps you have seen this truth

demonstrated in many retail stores where
the minds of the salespeople clearly are not
directed toward pleasing the customers.
Mental attitude controls, very largely, the
space one occupies in life, the success one
achieves, the friends one makes, and the
contributions one makes to posterity. It
would be no great overstatement of the
truth if we said that mental attitude is
EVERYTHING.
Mental attitude is the means by which one
may condition his mind to go through
surgery or dentistry without fear of physical
pain. The means by which this can be
accomplished are clearly described in
subsequent chapters.
There are some who believe that one’s
mental

attitude,

while

occupying

the

physical body during life, influences what
happens to one after death. There is no
positive proof of this theory except that it is
obviously logical.
Lastly, the most convincing evidence of the
importance of mental attitude is the fact
that it is the one and only thing over which
anyone has been given the complete,
unchallengeable

privilege

of

personal

control. We cannot control the thoughts or
the actions of other people. We cannot
control either our coming into or our going
out of life, but we do have the inexorable
privilege of controlling every thought we
release from our minds, from the time we
begin to think to the time that life is ended.
Here then is the most profound, the most
significant of all facts which influence an

individual’s life! It is logical that by giving
every person the complete control over his
thinking the Creator intended this to be a
priceless asset, and it is precisely that,
because the mind is the one and only
means by which an individual may plan his
own life and live it as he chooses.
Henley, the poet, must have understood
this great truth when he wrote the lines “I
am the Master of my Fate, I am the Captain
of my Soul.” Truly, we may become the
captains of our worldly destiny precisely to
the extent that we take possession of our
minds and direct them to definite ends
through control of our mental attitudes.
Mental Attitude Can Be Negative or
Positive

Only a positive mental attitude pays off in
the affairs of our everyday living, so let us
see what is, and how we may get it and
apply it in the struggle for the things and
circumstances we desire in life.
A positive mental attitude has many facets
and innumerable combinations for its
application

in

connection

with

every

circumstance which affects our lives.
First of all , a positive mental attitude is the
fixed purpose to make every experience,
whether it is pleasant or unpleasant, yield
some form of benefit which will help us to
balance our lives with all the things which
lead to peace of mind.
It is the habit of searching for “the seed of
an equivalent benefit” which comes with
every failure, defeat or adversity we

experience, and causing that seed to
germinate into something beneficial. Only a
positive mental attitude can recognize and
benefit by the lessons or the seed of an
equivalent benefit which comes with all
unpleasant things that one experiences.
A positive mental attitude is the habit of
keeping the mind busily engaged in
connection with the circumstances and
things one desires in life, and off the things
one does not desire. The majority of people
go all the way through life with their mental
attitudes dominated by fears and anxieties
and worries over circumstances which
somehow have a way of making their
appearance sooner or later. And the
strange part of this truth is that these
people often blame other people for the
misfortunes they have thus brought upon

themselves

by

their

negative mental

attitudes.
The mind has a definite way of clothing
one’s thoughts in appropriate physical
equivalents. Think in terms of poverty and
you will live in poverty. Think in terms of
opulence and you will attract opulence.
Through the eternal law of harmonious
attraction, one’s thoughts always clothe
themselves in material things appropriate
unto their nature.
A positive mental attitude is the habit of
looking upon all unpleasant circumstances
with

which

one

meets

as

merely

opportunities for one to test his capacity to
rise above them by searching for that “seed
of an equivalent benefit” and putting it to
work.

A positive mental attitude is the habit of
evaluating al problems and distinguishing
the difference between those one can
master and those one cannot control. The
person with a positive mental attitude
endeavors to solve the problems he can
control, and so relates himself to those he
cannot control that they do not influence his
mental attitude from positive to negative.
A positive mental attitude helps one to
make allowances for the frailties and
weaknesses

of

other

people

without

becoming shocked by their negativemindedness or being influenced by their
way of thinking.
A positive mental attitude is the habit of
acting with definiteness of purpose, with full

belief in both the soundness of that
purpose and one’s ability to achieve it.
It is the habit of going beyond the letter of
one’s responsibility and rendering more
and better service than one is obligated to
render, and doing it in a friendly, pleasing
manner.
It is the habit of choosing a definite goal
and marching forward toward its attainment
without

hesitating

because

of

either

commendation or condemnation.
It is the habit of looking for the good
qualities in other people and expecting to
find them, at the same time being prepared
to recognize unfavorable qualities without
being shocked into a negative state of
mind.

It is the habit of facing all the facts which
affect one’s life, both the pleasant and the
unpleasant, and keeping a cool head when
unpleasant emergencies arise.
It is recognition of the universal power of
Infinite Intelligence, and the knowledge that
it can be appropriated and directed to the
attainment of definite ends through the
medium of FAITH.
A positive mental attitude is the chief
medium by which Alcoholics Anonymous
has helped countless numbers of men and
women to cure themselves of alcoholism.
And it is also the basis of cure for the habit
of excessive smoking.
It is the medium of all forms of “mindconditioning” for whatsoever purposes,
including the elimination of all types of fear.

All habits, good or bad, voluntary or
involuntary, are established by one’s
mental attitude. It is the medium by which
one may transmute unpleasant habits and
circumstances into some form of benefit.
A positive mental attitude is the sole
medium by which one may exercise the
inherent right to maintain complete control
over his mind, without the help or hindrance
from anyone. And it is the means by which
stumbling blocks may be transmuted into
stepping stones of progress in every
calling.
Mental attitude reveals itself from one
person to another, without spoken words,
signs or actions, by the medium of
telepathy. Therefore, it is contagious.

A person’s mental attitude while eating aids
digestion or retards it, and a negative
mental attitude can paralyze the digestive
forces altogether.
The mental attitude of a public speaker
often determines how his speech is
interpreted, even more effectively than the
words he uses. Again, the mental attitude
of a writer while he is writing is conveyed to
the reader, behind the lines of his writing.
By the proper conditioning and control of
the mental attitude, one may condition his
mind to meet any sort of unpleasant
circumstance without becoming upset by it,
including even the emergency of death of
loved ones.
Mental attitude is a two-way gate across
the pathway of life which can be swung one

way into success and the other into failure.
The tragedy is that most people swing the
gate in the wrong direction.
The patient’s mental attitude is the doctor’s
best aid or his greatest hindrance in the
treatment of physical ailments, depending
upon whether the attitude is positive or
negative.
From the statements of known facts one
can easily understand why mental attitude
is everything, because it influences every
experience with which we meet, and it is
under our complete control at all times.
What a profound thought it is to recognize
that the one thing which can give us
success or bring us failure, bless us with
peace of mind, or curse us with misery all
the days of our lives, is simply the privilege

of taking possession of our own minds and
guiding them to whatever ends we choose,
through our mental attitude.
How Can One Control the Mental
Attitude?
The starting point of control of the mental
attitude is motive and desire. No one ever
does anything without a motive, or motives,
and the stronger the motive the easier it is
to control the mental attitude.
Mental attitude can be influenced and
controlled by a number of factors, such as
() By a BURNING DESIRE for the
attainment of a definite purpose based
upon one or more of the nine basic motives
which activate all human endeavor (see the
list of the nine basic motives in  ).

By conditioning the mind to automatically
choose and carry out definite positive
objectives, with the aid of the EIGHT
GUIDING PRINCES, or some similar
technique which will keep the mind busily
engaged with positive objectives, when
one is asleep as well as when one is
awake. (See description of the nature of the
EIGHT GUIDING PRINCES in chapter ).
() By close association with people who
inspire active engagement in positive
purposes, and refusal to be influenced by
negative-minded people.
() By autosuggestion through which the
mind is constantly given positive directives
until it attracts only that for which these
directives call.

() By a profound recognition, through its
adoption and use, of the individual’s
exclusive privilege of controlling and
directing his own mind.
() By the aid of a machine by which the
subconscious mind can be given definite
directives while one sleeps. (Such a
machine is briefly described in  ).
Our great American way of life, our
matchless system of free enterprise, and
the personal liberty of which we feel so
proud, are nothing more than the mental
attitude of people organized and directed to
specialized ends.
The one factor of the American way of life
which stands out boldly above all others
consists in the laws and mechanisms of
government we have set up to protect the

individual in the freedom of control over his
mental attitude.
It was this freedom of control over mental
attitude which gave us the great leaders
who patterned our American way of life and
our great system of free enterprise. And it
is significant that only those who moved
with a positive mental attitude became
leaders.
Thomas

A.

Edison’s

positive

mental

attitude sustained him through more than
ten thousand failures and led him to the
discovery of the incandescent electric light
which ushered in the great electrical age
and the fabulous riches it gave us.
Henry Ford’s positive mental attitude kept
him afloat during his early struggles in
building his first automobile, and it served

as his greatest and most important asses
in establishing the monumental industrial
empire which made him richer than
Croesus

and

provided

employment,

directly and indirectly, for perhaps more
than ten million men and women.
Andrew Carnegie’s positive mental attitude
lifted him up from poverty and obscurity
and served as his major asset in the
establishment of an industry which gave
birth to the great steel age, which now
serves as the most important link in our
entire economic system.
Mahatma Gandhi’s positive mental attitude
(he called it passive resistance) was more
than a match for the great power of the
British military forces which ruled India for
many generations. It was Gandhi’s positive

mental attitude which brought together a
Master Mind alliance of more than two
hundred million of his fellowmen who gave
mighty power to his “passive resistance”
and freed India from British control without
the firing of a gun or the loss of a single
soldier.
It was the positive mental attitude of the
building of the magnificent Gold Gate
suspension bridge which gave us the
world’s longest single-span bridge, despite
the fact that his first attempt indicated that
the job was an engineering impossibility.
Wherever we find leadership and great
achievement at any level of life, in any
calling or occupation, we recognize that it
is founded upon a positive mental attitude.

A positive mental attitude is the sum total
of hopes, wishes, and beliefs, added up
and transmuted into FAITH! And Faith is
the open door to Infinite Intelligence which
can be appropriated and used only by
those who maintain a positive mental
attitude.
And the most profound fact regarding a
positive mental attitude is that everyone
has the privilege of adopting it and using it
for all purposes, without money and without
price.
The secret by which this profound truth
may enrich your mind and give you mastery
over obstacles to happiness which you may
encounter the remainder of your life, has
been revealed in the chapters which follow.

Read with an open mind and you will be
rewarded with a form of riches sufficient to
give you a well-balanced life, freedom from
fear, and peace of mind which shall endure.
In the chapters which follow you will be
introduced to the greatest person now
living. When you discover the name of this
person, mark the page where the name
was revealed and sign it, for you will have
discovered a new meaning of the purpose
for which we are on this planet for the brief
span of years called Life.
In the chapters which follow, minute
instructions have been presented for
adjusting the mental attitude to eliminate
the fear of dental or medical surgery. This
chapter on mental attitude is a sort of
preview which will prepare you to accept
and

use

those

instructions

for

the

elimination

of

unpleasantness

in

connection with surgery or any other
undesirable circumstances with which you
may meet.

  A Visit Through the Valley of
Life’s Miracles
A little while ago I turned back the pages of
the Great Book of Time which my own
magnificent interlude with Life has been
recorded, and on the pages marked,
“Things I Have Discarded as Being Either
Harmless or Useless in Life,” I discovered
a gold mine of riches which I shall reveal
through this volume.
Why did I wait so long to make this
discovery of the fabulous riches I had
overlooked? The answer will be obvious
when the nature of my discovery has been
described. Before I could make this
discovery, I had to come of age spiritually;
I had to trade youth for maturity in order to
gain sufficient wisdom to give me the
capacity

to

recognize,

and

properly

interpret, these great riches “from within”
through eyes which are not deceived by the
false habits of men.
As I slowly turned the pages of this
astounding record in the Book of Time, I
was shocked to discover that everything,
every circumstance known to man, every
mistake and every failure and every
heartache, may become highly beneficial
when one relates himself to them in a spirit
of harmony and understanding of the
nature and purpose.
And I was agreeably surprised to learn, by
analyzing all the circumstances of my past
which I had considered unpleasant and
harmful at the time, that each of these had
yielded many of the only things of
permanent value which I now possess.

During my exploration of this Great Book of
Time, I discovered a previously unknown
method by which all of man’s past failures,
mistakes,

and

frustrations

may

be

transmuted into the richest blessings
known to mankind. It was this discovery
which left me no alternative but to write this
volume for the benefit of those who are
groping in darkness for the way to peace of
mind, just as I was blindly searching for it
for nearly forty years.
Before I rummaged through the scrap heap
of ideas and things I had feared and
discarded as useless, I believed the secret
of

successful

achievement

could

be

revealed only by studying those who were
successful.

Having been commissioned by Andrew
Carnegie to give the world its first practical
philosophy of success, and through Mr.
Carnegie, having had close access to more
than five hundred of the top-ranking
successes of his era, I naturally looked to
these men of great achievement as the
only source of usable knowledge worthy of
consideration by those who are trying to
find

their

places

in

an

intensively

competitive world.
I

have

now

abandoned

this

false

conclusion, for I have discovered that the
eternal

laws

of

successful

human

achievement are as available to the poor
and the humble as they are to the rich and
the proud.

My first shocking realization of this great
truth came with my first meeting with an
uneducated black man who was born in the
South and earned his bread by the sweat
of his brow. When I first heard of his story,
I sought him out and gave him a searching
and critical analysis, for I had a keen desire
to learn the true secret of his dramatic
rebirth from rags to riches within an
unbelievably brief time.
On a hot summer day this many stopped at
the end of a row of cotton, leaned on his
hoe handle, mopped his brow, and cried
out in agony “Oh, Lord! Why do I have to
work like this and get nothing out of it but a
hut to sleep in and sow-belly to eat?”
His cry brought an answer and started a
series of events which changed the lives of

mil ions of people who were destined to
hear his story.
I have chosen this man’s story as an
introduction to this chapter, because it so
perfectly illustrates the soundness of the
counsel I shall offer through subsequent
chapters to those who are searching for
material riches, peace of mind, and a better
understanding of the means of mastering al
unpleasant circumstances.
Because of the place of his birth and the
color of his skin, this man had two strikes
against him from the start, but purely by
that chance question, he tuned in on one of
the great miracles of life, which will be
described later, and lifted himself to a
position of fame and fortune unknown to
the majority of people – even those who

have had the privilege of formal educations
in our great universities.
First of all, the answer to the man’s
question gave him contact with the first
principle of personal success, Definiteness
of Purpose, and a definite plan for its
attainment.
And that purpose was nothing less than the
trading of his old personality for a much
greater one – a personality with the power
to acquire whatever it desired regardless of
race, creed, or color – the sort of
personality I shall endeavor to help every
reader of this volume to attain.
Forthwith, in compliance with the answer
the man received to his question, he
appointed himself to the high Priesthood as
God In Person, the one and only true living

God to all the people of the earth. Whatever
one may think of a man’s choice of a
Definite Major Purpose, he cannot be
charged with an inferiority complex, which
is the dominating influence in so many
lives.
Now, before any conclusions are reached
concerning this man’s self-appointment to
so high a station in life, let me give a
briefing as to how far he has already gone
in the attainment of his Major Purpose.
Perhaps you will sober your judgment of
him, and instead of condemning him, it
might be more beneficial if you found out
something of the powers he adopted, to
raise himself to his ultimate high position in
life.

This man gave himself the very impressive
pseudonym of Father Divine. He gained a
following estimated as in the mil ions,
including large numbers of whites, located
in nearly every state of the U.S. and in
some foreign countries.
Father Divine was given the stewardship of
vast amounts of money, all in the form of
voluntary donations. He travelled in a Ross
Royce and slept in his own hotels in many
of the cities where he visited, so there was
never a question of his staying in any but
the pleasantest accommodations; the color
bar did not affect him. His huge and
complex organization operated many kinds
of businesses, from pushcarts to dress
shops and restaurants – al staffed by
volunteer help.

How much good Father Divine’s opulence
brought to others is of no concern here. I
do not mean to sell Father Divine to anyone
at this late date, certainly.
However, it is the author’s purpose to
acquaint you with the nature of the
“miracle” that Father Divine stumbled upon,
perhaps by sheer chance, which gave him
freedom from the handicap of poverty and
lack

of

education

and

made

him

exceedingly rich.
This information is intended for your
benefit, not that you may emulate Father
Divine, but to inspire you to excel him in
your own chosen field of service to
mankind, whether it be in the realm of
religion or in some other useful service. Or
you may be content to use the information

merely for softening the burdens of your
own personal life.
The secret of Father Divine’s riches is not
new to me. I have devoted over forty years
to its study, and I have seen it work
successfully in the lives of more than five
hundred of the outstanding men of this
nation with whom I have worked, and who
collaborated with me over a long period of
years in the organization of the Science of
Success – men like Henry Ford, Thomas A.
Edison,

Dr.

Alexander

Graham

Bell,

Woodrow Wilson, and William Howard
Taft.
The strangest fact concerning this supreme
secret of personal success, as revealed by
close study of those distinguished men with
whom I worked, was that not one of them –

with the exception of three – understood
the real source of their success, or the
nature of the power which made it possible
on so fabulous a scale. The vast majority of
them stumbled upon this great “miracle”
very much in the same manner as did
Father Divine.
Those who are seeking the true secret of
his achievements will not overlook the fact
that if he had a voluntary following of thirty
million people, or even one million, he must
have possessed some mysterious power of
attraction not usual y possessed by those
who are motivated entirely by greed for
material things.
Here, as in other chapters, the author has
endeavored to emphasize the fact that the
secret of financial prosperity is precisely

the same as that through which one may
transmute physical pain or any unpleasant
circumstance into benefits.
In this chapter, and in those which follow, I
shall

fully

describe

the

“miracle”

responsible for Father Divine’s success,
but I shall do more than that. I shall
describe

some

additional

miracles

available to all the people of the earth –
miracles

which

are

only

partial

y

recognized and seldom used, although
they provide the real path to peace of mind
and material riches in abundance.
All, except approximately one person out of
every ten million people who may read the
list of “miracles” I shall describe, will be
shocked and surprised to learn that I have
listed them as potential riches of the

highest order. That one person out of every
ten million will not be shocked or surprised
because he or she will belong in the same
class with the Edison’s, and the Ford’s, and
the Father Divine’s who stumbled upon the
“miracle” and used it to shape destiny to
their own self-styled patterns of life.
As we travel through the “Valley of Life’s
Miracles,” one of which was definitely
responsible for Father Divine’s transition
from extreme poverty and ignorance into
fabulous wealth, and wisdom sufficient to
manage it, you will have reason to rejoice if
you recognize the particular “miracle” by
which this change was wrought. If you do
not make the discovery in this chapter, it
may be revealed to you in subsequent
chapters, where I have recorded all that is

known of the path that leads to peace of
mind and plenty.
Here are some cues which may aid you in
analyzing Father Divine accurately
The exact time, place, and circumstances
where his new birth took place were
matters entirely of his own choice and
under his control.
No one aided him or suggested to him the
possibility of his throwing off ignorance and
poverty and taking on in their place
fabulous wealth and wisdom. This point is
empahsized because naturally it suggests
that whatever an uneducated man has
done, any other person of equal mental
capacity may duplicate or excel, in any
chosen field of human endeavor.

Could anyone reasonably doubt that the
formula,

through

which

this

man

exchanged poverty for vast riches, may
also serve to transmute any undesirable
circumstance into a benefit of equivalent
proportions?
Wherein does the difference exist between
this particular man and the others of his
race who live in the United States, and who
have the same privileges he had acquired
for himself? The answer to this question
may give you a sound clue to the “miracle”
which

transformed

this

self-appointed

Messiah from a nobody, in the direst of
poverty, to a somebody, in command of
overabundance.
The

“miracle”

responsible

for

Father

Divine’s changed life is precisely the same

as that which lifted Henry Form and
Thomas A. Edison and Andrew Carnegie to
stupendous

heights

of

personal

achievement in their respective fields, and
it is the same “miracle” which has been
responsible for al of the progress made by
the human race in al fields of endeavor.
Through the aid of this “miracle,” Milo C.
Jones, owner of a small farm near Fort
Atkinson, Wisconsin, made himself a
millionaire after he had been stricken with
double paralysis; and he round his success
on the same farm where previously he had
made only a fair living.
Students of the author who have found
prosperity, solved “impossible” personal
problems, and found peace of mind
through the aid of the “miracle,” are legion.

They exist in nearly every walk of life, every
business, every profession, throughout a
large portion of the world. For this reason,
the illustrations given throughout this
volume

have

been

adequately

authenticated over more than forty years of
research.
Dr. Frank Crane was the pastor of a small
church in Chicago, from which he barely
earned a living. As a student of this author,
he discovered the “miracle” that yielded
him the idea of publishing his sermons in a
syndicated

newspaper

column

which

brought him an income of more than
$, yearly.
What has all this to do with the mastery of
fear and physical pain and sorrow, and the
multiple frustrations one may encounter

throughout life? Just how can the principle
which helps people become financially rich
serve as well to separate physical pain
from the dentist’s drill or the surgeon’s
scalpel?
Be patient, read carefully, with an open
mind, and you shall have the answers to
these and all other questions which may
arise in your mind before the “miracle” is
revealed to you.
If you should impatiently demand that the
“miracle” be revealed in the first chapter of
this volume, the author would answer by
telling you of something which happened
while he was a very small boy, but which
made a lasting impression on his mind.
Grandfather took some corn out to the
chicken house, scattered it over the dirt

floor and then carefully covered it with
straw. When asked why he went to al this
trouble, he replied, “For two very good
reasons Number one, covering the corn
with straw so the chickens will have to
scratch to find it, gives them the exercise
they need to be healthy; and secondly, it
gives them a chance to get pleasure from
showing how smart they are in finding the
corn which they think I tried to hide from
them.”
And now let us turn to the analysis of some
of

the

minor

“miracles”

one

must

understand and properly evaluate before
the nature of the major “miracle,” which
gives one a transformed life, can be
revealed. Perhaps the most misunderstood
of all these “miracles” is the one described
in the next chapter, because it reveals the

starting place from which one must take off
in exchanging the circumstances of life he
does not desire, for those which he covets.

  The Law of Growth through
Change
The First Miracle of Life
Eternal change has been chosen to head
the list of the Miracles of Life, not
essentially because it is the most important
of those here described, but for the reason
that it is the one most bitterly opposed by
the vast majority of the human race. Failure
to understand it and adapt oneself to it is
the major cause of al personal failures and
defeats.
The changes in our way of living have
revealed, during the first half of the
twentieth century, more of nature’s secrets
than had been uncovered during the entire
past of civilization. Among these have been
the invention of the automobile, the

telephone,

radio,

television,

talking

pictures, airplanes, radar, and wireless
telegraphy – al produced by everchanging
processes of the human mind.
Change is the tool of human progress, in
the affairs of nations not less than in the
lives of individuals. And the business or
industry which neglects to keep moving
forward through change is doomed to
failure.
The great American way of life, which has
provided the people the people with the
highest standard of living the world has
ever known, has been the product of
continuous change.
The Law of Change is one of Nature’s
inexorable laws, without which there could
have been no such reality as civilization.

Without the law of change the human race
would still be where it started from – on the
plane with all the other animals and
creatures of the earth which are eternally
bound and limited by a pattern of instinct,
beyond which they never rise.
Through the law of change (popularly
known as evolution), the human race has
slowly left the baseline of the animal family,
where the destiny of all living things was
fixed by a life pattern of instinct and has
evolved into higher and still higher degrees
of intelligence, until man now is something
infinitely greater than the thirty-thousand
man-made gods whom he has created and
worshiped since the beginning of his long
and tortuous trip upward.

The entire history of mankind, the record of
life in all its forms, is a clearly marked
pattern of perpetual change. No living thing
is the same two minutes in succession, and
this change is so inexorable that the entire
physical body

of

man

undergoes

a

complete change, and a replacement of all
the physical cells of the body, every seven
months.
The law of change is the Creator’s device
for separating man form the remainder of
the animal families. It is also the device by
which the eternal verities of life, the habits
and thoughts of men are continuously
reshaping themselves into a better system
of human relations leading toward harmony
and better understanding among men. And
it is one of the devices one must use in

mastering fixed habits which cause the fear
of physical pain.
Through the law of change, the habits of
men, which do not conform to the overall
pattern and purpose of the universe, are
periodically broken up by wars, epidemics
of disease, drought, and other irresistible
forces of nature which force man to free
himself from the effects of his follies and
start all over again. This same law of
change, which levels the peoples of all
nations to the baseline of the overall plan
of the universe, applies with equal force to
individuals who fail to interpret and adapt
themselves to nature’s laws.
“Conform to the overall plan or perish,” is
nature’s warning!

The fears and the failures of men, the
shocks and disappointments in human
relations, all are designed to shake man
loose

from

habits

to

which

he

so

tenaciously clings, so he may adopt,
embrace, and benefit by better habits of
growth.
The whole purpose of education, or so it
should be at least, is to start the mind of the
individual to growing and developing from
within; to cause the mind to evolve and
expand through constant changes in the
thinking processes, so that the individual
may eventually become acquainted with
his own potential powers and thereby be
capable of solving his personal problems.
Evidence that this theory conforms with
nature’s plans may be found in the fact that

the better educated people of all times are
those who graduate from the great
UNIVERSITY

OF

HARD

KNOCKS,

through experiences which force them to
develop and use their mind-power.
The law of change is one of the greatest of
all sources of education! Understand this
truth and you will no longer oppose the
changes which give you a wider scope of
understanding of yourself and of the world
at large. And you will no longer resist
nature’s breaking up of some of the habits
you have formed which have not brought
you peace of mind or material riches.
The traits the Creator most emphatically
frowns

upon

complacency,

in

human

beings

are

self-satisfaction,

procrastination, fear and self-imposed

limitations, all of which carry heavy
penalties which are exacted from those
who indulge such traits.
Through the law of change, man is forced
to keep on growing. Whenever a nation, a
business institution, or an individual,
ceases to change and settles into a rut of
routine habits, some mysterious power
enters and smashes the setup, breaks up
old habits, lays the foundation for new and
better habits.
In everything and everyone the law of
growth is through eternal change!
Flexibility of personality – the capacity of an
individual to adapt himself to al the
circumstances which affect his life – is one
of the major factors of an attractive
personality. Also, it is the medium of

adaptability to the great law of growth
through change.
The Ford Motor Company was pyramided
form the humble beginning of a one-room
brick factory into one of the world’s greatest
industrial empires, which provides directly
and indirectly employment for hundreds of
thousands of people.
Henry Ford, the founder, despite all his
traits of genius in industrial management,
very nearly wrecked the business on at
least wo occasions because his capacity
for flexibility – the ability to change – had
not kept up with his years. After his death,
the business was taken over by his
grandson, a mere youth in comparison with
the founder of the business, but a young
man with great flexibility and willingness to

follow the law of growth through change. In
a matter of a few years the young man
transformed the Ford industrial empire into
an institution far in advance of anything his
grandfather had accomplished during his
entire lifetime.
In

labor

relations,

in

industrial

management, in automobile designing and
styling, young Henry Ford proved himself to
be a man who invited change instead of
fighting it, and by this application of
wisdom, made of himself an industrial
wizard overnight.
On every hand the soul of man cries out,
saying in effect Wake up, get wise to
yourself, throw off your old habits before
they bind you in slavery and force you to
come back for another try at life through a

new incarnation. If you wish to finish the job
while you are here, you must adapt yourself
to the great law of change and continue to
grow.
The soul of man cries out in words of
warning and says Everything, every
circumstance which touches your life,
whether it be pleasant or unpleasant, is
grist for your Mill of Life. Embrace it as
such, grind it into your chosen pattern of
living and let it serve instead of tormenting
you through fear and worry.
An old Virginia family was born and reared
in the mountains of southwest Virginia, in
comparative poverty. At long last he
railroads came and the rich coal fields were
put into operation. This family sold their
mountain land for a fabulous sum, moved

into town, and built a new modern home.
When the house was completed, with three
bathrooms equipped with all modern
conveniences, the wife refused to permit
the contractor to be paid because she
claimed the job had not been finished.
“What,”

the

contractor

inquired,

“is

missing?”
“You know well enough what is missing,”
the wife replied. “There is no backhouse on
the place.”
“Well,” explained the surprised contractor,
“backhouses went out of style when you
moved to town. You now have three
beautiful

bathrooms

where

you

may

perform all necessary bodily attentions in
private and with great comfort.”

“All my life,” the wife exclaimed, “I have
enjoyed reading Sears and Roebuck’s
catalogue in my backhouse, and I have no
intention of giving up that pleasure at my
age. Build that backhouse or you’ll get no
money.”
The backhouse was built! When the wife
inspected it, she argued, “It will not do! It
has only one hole in the seat and we have
always had two holes.”
So, another hole was provided, and for
good measure the contractor installed
plumbing for hot and cold water, also a
telephone, so the wealthy old lady could
attend to her social duties and read her
Sears and Roebuck catalogue in the
backhouse.

Complacency and old habits had won a
victory over change and progress.
When cash registers were first introduced,
the manufacturers had great difficulty in
getting merchants to install them, and
salespeople in general went into spasms
over them. Store clerks frowned upon the
new devices as being a suggestion that
they were dishonest, and merchants
protested that the cost of the machines,
plus the time required for their operation,
would eat too deeply into their profits.
But the law of change is persistent and
inevitable! Today no merchant in his right
mind would try to operate a retail business,
in which but himself had to handle cash
receipts, without the aid of the cash
register.

When

the

Federal

Reserve

Banking

System was forced into operation by the
Congress of the United States, the bankers
in general sent up a howl of protest. The
system meant radical change, and the
bankers, like everyone else, were opposed
to any changes which broke up their
established ways of doing business. The
Federal Reserve Banking System proved
to be the greatest safeguard for the banks
that was ever introduced, and today if it
were suggested that the system be
abolished, the bankers probably would put
up an equal y loud cry against the change.
Of the utmost significance is the fact that
the Creator provided man with the one and
only means by which he has broken away
from the animal family and ascended into
spiritual estates, where he may be the

master of his own earthly fate. The means
thus provided is the law of change. By the
simple process of changing his mental
attitude, man can draw for himself any
pattern of life and living he chooses and
make that pattern a reality. This is the one
and only thing over which man has been
provided with irrevocable, unchallenged,
and unchallengeable powers of absolute
control – a fact which suggests that it must
have been considered by the Creator to be
the most important prerogative of man.
Dictators and would-be world conquerors
come and go. They always go because it is
not a part of the overall plan of the universe
for man to be enslaved. It is rather a part of
the eternal pattern that every man shall be
free, to live his own life his own way, to

control his thoughts and his deeds, to make
his own earthly destiny.
That is why the philosopher, who looks
backward into the past to determine what is
going to happen in the yet unborn future,
cannot get excited because a Hitler or a
Stalin momentarily basks in the light of his
own ego and threatens the freedom of
mankind. For these men, like all others of
their ilk who have preceded them, will
destroy

themselves

with

their

own

excesses and vanities and their lusts for
power over the free world. Moreover, these
would-be stranglers of human freedom
may be only demons who unwittingly serve
as shock troops to awaken man from his
complacency and make way for the change
that will bring new and better ways of living.

Nature leads man through change after
change by peaceful means as long as man
cooperates,

but

she

resorts

to

revolutionary methods if man rebels and
neglects or refuses to conform to the law of
change. The revolutionary method may
consist in the death of a loved one or a
severe il ness; it may bring a failure in
business, or the loss of a job, which forces
the individual to change his occupation and
seek employment in an entirely new field,
where he will find greater opportunities
which he would never have known if his old
habits had not been broken up.
Nature enforces the law of fixation of habits
in every living thing lower than man, and
just as definitely enforces the law of change
in the habits of man. Nature thus provides
the only means by which man may grow

and evolve in accordance with his fixed
position in the overall plan of the universe.
Thomas A. Edison’s first major adversity
was experienced when his teacher sent
him home after only three months in a
graded school, with a note to his parents
saying he did not have the capacity to take
an education. He never went back to
school – a conventional school, that is – but
he began to school himself in the great
University of Hard Knocks, where he
gained an education which made him one
of the greatest inventors of al times. Before
he was graduated from that university, he
was fired from one job after another, while
the hand of Destiny guided him through the
essential changes which prepared him to
become

a

great

inventor.

A

formal

schooling perhaps would have spoiled his
chances of becoming great.
Nature knows what she is about when
adversity, physical pain, sorrow, distress,
failure and temporary defeat overtake one.
Remember this and profit by it the next time
you meet with adversity. And instead of
crying out in rebellion, or shivering with
fear, hold your head high and look in al
directions for that seed of an equivalent
benefit

which

is

carried

in

every

circumstance of adversity.
I am never frightened by revolutionary
changes in my life, whether they are
voluntary,

or

forced

upon

me

by

circumstances of an unpleasant nature
over which I have no control, for I do at
least have control over my reaction to these

circumstances.

And

I

exercise

this

privilege, not by complaining, but by
searching for that seed of an equivalent
benefit which each experience carries with
it.
The book you are reading is literally the
product of over forty years of continuous
and oftentimes drastic changes I have had
to make in my way of life. Many of the
changes were forced; some of them were
voluntary, but all of them added up, at long
last, to the revelation of the secret of peace
of mind and material prosperity.
When I was commissioned by Andrew
Carnegie to begin research in preparation
for the organization of the world’s first
practical

philosophy

of

personal

achievement, I was so little prepared for the

job that truthfully, I did not know the
meaning of the word “philosophy” until I
looked it up in a dictionary.
If ever anyone began a job by starting at
scratch, I began right there! What I had to
do to prepare myself for the successful
fulfilment of the assignment Mr. Carnegie
had given me was not mere change; it was
practically a complete rebuilding job!
Perhaps this was fortunate because the
knowledge I gained from my own personal
struggles led eventually to the revelation of
the supreme “miracle” which is the central
purpose in writing this volume.
The rebuilding job included the changing of
self-made habits of failure for self-made
habits of success, which at long last gave
me a balanced life that includes everything

I desire or need for the style of living I have
chosen.
Among other changes I had to make in
preparation for my life work were these
(a) Curing the habit of selling myself short
because of lack of self-confidence.
(b) Freeing myself from the habit of yielding
to the seven basic fears, including the fear
of ill health and physical pain.
(c) Removing the habit of binding myself of
penury and want through my self-imposed
limitations.
(d) Breaking the habit of neglect in taking
possession of my own mind and directing it
to the attainment of all my desires.

(e) Curing myself of the habit of failure to
relate myself to recognition and freedom
from want in a spirit of humble gratitude.
(f) Changing the habit of expecting to reap
before I had sown. (Confusing my NEEDS
with my RIGHTS to receive).
(g) Curing myself of the false belief that
HONESTY

and

SINCERITY

OF

PURPOSE alone will lead to success.
(h)

Changing

the

false

belief

that

EDUCATION comes only through the
media of higher learning.
(i) Correcting the habit of neglecting to
schedule my life on a practical budget and
use of TIME.

(j) Curing myself of the habit of failure to
devote the major portion of my TIME to the
pursuit of my Definite Major Purpose in life.
(k) Changing my habit of impatience.
(l) Correcting the habit of failure to take
inventory of all my intangible riches and
express gratitude for them.
(m) Correction of the habit of believing it is
more beneficial to RECEIVE than to GIVE.
(n) Last, but not least, correcting the habit
of neglect in recognizing the source of
Infinite Intelligence and the means of
contacting and using it for any desired
purpose – by application of the SUPREME
MIRACLE.
These do not represent the entire list of
changes I had to make in my habits of

thought and action, but they are some of
the more important ones, from which it will
be obvious that the LAW OF CHANGE has
played an important part of my life, and just
as obvious, that had I not made these
changes, I would have deprived myself of
the privilege of giving the world a workable
philosophy of personal success, which has
brought me more recognition than one
person needs on this plane of life.
In presenting these intimate circumstances
of my life so frankly, I hope you will
recognize that I am preparing you to accept
the truth that perhaps you too will need to
change some of your habits before you
may enjoy a full, well-balanced life made to
your own pattern and style of living.

The extent to which you will need to make
changes in your present habits is entirely
something you will have to decide, but the
list must include the mastery of the seven
basic fears if you aspire to the attainment
of a well-balanced life, which includes
peace of mind.
The seven basic fears are as follows
() The Fear of POVERTY
() The Fear of CRITICISM
() The Fear

of

ILL HEALTH and

PHYSICAL PAIN
() The Fear of the LOSS of LOVE
() The Fear of the LOSS of LIBERTY
() The Fear of DEATH

In the chapters which follow you will be
given instructions for the mastery of these
and all other fears, through the application
of new habits of thinking which you must
develop and use in the place of the old
habits which have made these fears
possible.
Whatever

other

changes

may

be

necessary to give you a well-rounded life
will not alter the fact that mastery of these
seven basic fears is a “must” in your
rebuilding program.
Take heart from the promise that these
corrective instructions will impose upon
you no hardships nor actions beyond your
ability to control. They have a price
attached to them, but it is a price well within
the means of all normal people.

We are where we are and what we are
because of our daily habits!
Our habits are under our individual control
and they may be changed at any time by
the mere will to change them. This
prerogative is the one and only privilege
over which the individual has complete
control. Habits are made by our thinking,
and our thinking is the one thing over which
the Creator gave us complete right of
control; and along with this right, profound
rewards for our exercising the right, and
terrible penalties for our failure to exercise
it.

  Our Unseen Guides
The Second Miracle of Life
Our unseen guides, whose existence can
be proved only by those who have
recognized

them

and

accepted

their

services, remain at our service from the
time of our birth until our death.
These invisible talismans remain with us
while we are awake and watch over us
while we sleep, although most people go
through life without recognizing their
existence.
It is not my purpose to give a long
dissertation as evidence of the existence of
unseen guides who aid human beings, but
merely to bring them to the attention of my
fellow wayfarers who are willing to accept

whatever sources of aid they can find in
their search for a way of life which satisfies
one’s needs and leads to peace of mind.
Had it not been for the aid I received from
my friendly unseen guides, I never could
have given the world the Science of
Success which now aids mil ions of people
to recognize and make practical use of their
inner sources of power.
Eight of my unseen guides have been
recognized and named, each with a name
appropriate to the nature of the service it
renders. They are here described in detail,
but one should keep in mind the fact that
the Eight Guiding Princes are the product
of my own imagination and they may be
duplicated by anyone who chooses to
engage them.

I treat my Eight Guiding Princes as though
they were real people whose entire
services are at my command throughout
life. I give them orders and thank them for
their services just as I would do if they were
people. And they react to my requests as
though they were real people.
A description of the Eight Guiding Princes,
together with an explanation of the service
each performs, now follows.
The Eight Guiding Princes
. Prince of Financial Prosperity
The sole responsibility of this invisible
guide is to keep me adequately supplied
with every material thing which I desire or
need to maintain the style of living which I
have adopted. Money worries, which

destroy the peace of mind of so many
people

throughout

their

lives,

are

something I never experience. When I
need money, it is always available in
whatever amounts I may require, but
money is neither expected nor obtained
without my giving something of equal value
in return – usually in some form of service
rendered for the benefit of others.
. Prince of Sound Physical Health
The sole responsibility of this invisible
guide is that of keeping my physical body
in perfect order at all times, including the
conditioning

of

the

body

for

any

adjustments which have to be made, such
as that of preparation for dentistry. Before
this Prince took over, I was subject to
headaches, constipation, and at times

physical exhaustion, all of which have been
corrected. The Prince of Sound Physical
Health keeps all the vital organs of my body
alert and functioning at all times, keeps the
billions of individual cells of my body
properly charged with bodily resistance,
and provides adequate immunity against al
contagious diseases.
Let it be remembered, however, that I
cooperate with the Prince of Sound
Physical Health by sensible living habits,
such as proper eating, the right amount of
sleep, and habits which balance my work
with an equal amount of play. But
particularly, I keep my mind occupied with
positive, constructive thinking, and never
permit it to engage in any form of fear,
superstition or hypochondria. And lastly,
with every morsel of food and every drop of

liquid which goes into my mouth I add a
generous mixture of worship, through
which I express thanks to my invisible
guide, the Prince of Sound Physical Health,
for

maintenance

of

perfect

health

throughout my body.
I enjoy a peaceful calmness throughout my
life, in all of my activities and experiences,
but especial y do I make it a business to eat
my food in an atmosphere of joyous
serenity. We have no set hour for family
discipline in our home, but if we did have
such as hour it would not be at mealtime,
as is the case in many homes.
Every thought one expresses while eating
becomes a part of the energy which goes
into the food and enters the blood stream,
and that thought makes its way to the brain

where it blesses or curses one according to
whether the thought is positive or negative.
Evidence of this truth may be found in the
case of the mother who nurses her child at
her breast. If she becomes worried or
negative-minded for any reason while the
child is nursing, her state of mind will
poison her milk and give the child
indigestion or cholic. And of course, it is
well known to doctors that most stomach
ulcers are due mainly to worry and negative
thinking.
It is obvious, therefore, that the Prince of
Sound Physical Health must have a
considerable

amount

of

intelligent

cooperation in order to keep the physical
body operating efficiently and normally.
This is the price one must pay for good
health.

. Prince of Peace of Mind
The sole responsibility of this invisible
guide is to keep the mind free from
disturbing

influences,

such

as

fear,

superstition, greed, envy, hatred and
covetousness. The work of the Prince of
Peace of Mind is closely related to that of
the Prince of Sound Physical Health.
Through the work of this invisible guide,
one may shut off al thoughts of unpleasant
circumstances of the past and all thoughts
of unpleasant circumstances contemplated
for the future, such as that of surgical
operations or dentistry.
The Prince of Peace of Mind keeps the
mind so fully occupied with subjects of
one’s choosing that there is no space left in
it for voluntary, stray thoughts of a negative

nature. To these, the doors of the mind are
tightly closed! This invisible guide throws a
wall of protection around one, which keeps
out everything which could lead to worry or
fear or anxiety of any nature, except only
those

circumstances

legitimate

right

to

which

have

a

consideration

in

connection with one’s obligations to others;
and these are so modified that they are
easily managed.
There always are human relations which
may be unpleasant temporarily, which one
must recognize and deal with – such as the
details of management of a business, or a
profession or job, or the family budget –
and

there

always

are

unpleasant

emergencies one must meet – such as the
death of friends or loved ones. To all of
these the Prince of Peace of Mind helps the

individual relate himself without being
thrown off mental balance.
. and . Prince of Hope & Prince of Faith
(operating as twins)
The sole responsibility of these invisible
guides is that of keeping the gateway to
Infinite Intelligence open to me at all times,
under all circumstances. These twins keep
me

from

handicapping

myself

with

unnecessary limitations in connection with
my life work. And they help me to so
organize my plans that they conform to the
laws of nature and the rights of my
fellowmen. They help me also to see my
plans a completed reality, even before I
begin putting them into operation; and they
turn me back from undertaking any plan or

purpose which, if it were carried out, might
be of ultimate harm to me or to others.
The Princes of Hope and Faith keep me in
constant touch with the spiritual forces
which operate through me, and they guide
me

toward

objectives

which

benefit

everyone with whom I come into contact,
either in person or by my written works.
There then is the explanation as to why the
readers of my books are so universally
successful in the planning and living of their
own lives.
These Princes of Hope and Faith keep me
charged with enthusiasm sufficient to
insure me against procrastination. They
keep my imagination alert and active in
planning the work to which I devote my
entire life. They help me find joy and

happiness in everything I do. And they help
me interpret the evils of the world without
embracing them or being injured by them.
They help me walk with al men, both the
saints and the sinners, and still remain the
master of my own fate, the captain of my
own soul! They keep my ego alert and
active, yet humble and grateful. And lastly,
they help me ride the waves of chaos and
confusion in a world which is undergoing
rapid changes in human relations, without
giving up or neglecting my own inalienable
privilege or controlling and directing my
own mind to whatsoever ends I may
choose.
With Hope and Faith as my constant guides
I meet successfully the resistances and the
unpleasant

experiences

of

life

by

transmuting them into positive forces,

through which I carry my aims and
purposes to conclusion. With the aid of
these twin guides everything which comes
to my mill of life is made into the first of
opportunity.
. and . Prince of Love & Prince of
Romance
The sole responsibility of these invisible
guides is to keep me youthful in both body
and mind, and they do their work so well
that I celebrate every birthday by deducting
a year from my age! And the joyful result is
that I feel, think, work, and play as if I were
twenty years younger.
The Princes of Love and Romance make of
my

work

a

discouragement

joy

which

or

fatigue,

knows

not

and they

stimulate my imagination to create with

ease the patterns of all things I desire to
accomplish.
These invisible guides help me to live again
the loves and the fantasies of the days
which have flown, and they bring back
memories of past experiences which have
served to introduce me to my “other self;”
that self which embraces the beauties and
avoids the unpleasantness of life.
Love and Romance have aided me in
exchanging for wisdom

the sorrows,

frustrations and failures of the past, and
they have given refinement to my soul
which could have been attained by no other
means. They help me recognize the
objective of my earthly destiny and provide
me with the means of surmounting the
obstacles I must surmount to attain my

destiny. They help me in making every day
of my life pay off in dividends of joy which
more than compensate for the necessity of
struggle that each day calls for.
Love and Romance have made me flexible
and adaptable to all the circumstances
which affect my life, both the pleasant the
unpleasant, so that I do not forfeit the
privilege of controlling and directing my
mind to whatsoever ends I choose.
They provide me with a keen sense of
humanity with which I adjust myself
favorably in all my human relations, and
they help me attract the people and the
circumstances which I need to make me
grateful for my sojourn in life.
Love and Romance help me recognize and
germinate and develop in growth that seed

of an equivalent benefit which comes in
every adversity, every frustration, every
failure and every disappointment.
Love and Romance are the sole means by
which I gracefully exchange youth for the
wisdom with which I write my own price tag
on the business of living and make Life pay
off on my own terms. And they restrain me
from wanting too much; prevent me from
settling for too little. They have taught me
to pray, “Help me, O Lord, to acquire the
things which are good for me and prevent
me from acquiring things I do not need.”
Love and Romance are the interior
decorators of the upper room in which
dwells my soul! They make me grateful for
the things I have; keep me from sorrowing
over the things I have not. And should I

indulge

my

Love

where

it

is

not

reciprocated,
Romance helps me find compensation in
the joy I had in the indulgence itself and
recognize that Love rebounds to the benefit
of those who express it, even though it may
not be reciprocated.
Love and Romance help me express pity
for others where, without these guides, I
might express hatred, and they heal quickly
the wounds inflicted upon me by the
injuries and injustices of others.
. Prince of Overall Wisdom
The responsibilities of this Prince consist in
multiple services. First of all, the Prince of
Overall Wisdom inspires eternal action on
the part of the other seven Princes to the

end that each carries out his duties to the
fullest extent possible and protects me
while I sleep the same as while I am awake.
This invisible guide performs another, and
a very miraculous service, by transmuting
into benefits to me all the failures and
defeats and unpleasant circumstances I
have experienced in the past, so that
everything which has affected my life in the
past has been converted into an asset of
great value.
The Prince of Overall Wisdom gives me
guidance

at

the

crossroads

of

life,

whenever I may be in doubt as to which
road to take and gives me the go-ahead or
a stop signal in connection with all my aims,
plans and purposes.

There are other unseen Guides at my
service whose names I do not know. Nor
do I understand completely the full extent
and nature of the services they render,
except that whatever I may need to carry
on my life work, or whatever I may desire
to give me continuous peace of mind, is
always at my command without effort or
anxiety on my part.
These mysterious Guides first came to my
attention many years ago, by interrupting
my plans with definite failure when I strayed
away from my major mission in life – that
mission being the organization and the
spreading of the Science of Success.
From time to time, as I gained recognition
form the public in connection with my life
work, I was offered what seemed to me

fabulous opportunities to commercialize
my talents and my experience. One of
these opportunities was offered me by the
late Ivy Lee, Public Relations Counsellor
for the Rockefeller family. Although the
deal never was consummated, I did accept
the offer, and that mere acceptance cost
me the loss of the Golden Rule Magazine
which I had founded as a by-product of my
philosophy.
After I had met with one failure after
another, and each time was tempted to
desert or neglect my major mission in life, I
began to notice that the effects of each
failure were immediately wiped out the
moment I got back on the track and began
to carry out my mission. This happened so
often that it could not be explained away as
a mere coincidence.

From personal experiences, I know there
are friendly Guides available to everyone
who will recognize them and accept their
services. In order to avail oneself of the
services of these unseen Guides, two
things are necessary; first, one must
express

gratitude

for

their

services;

second, one must follow their guidance to
the letter.
Neglect in this respect will bring sure, if not
always swift, disaster. Perhaps this may
explain why some people meet with
disasters, the cause of which they cannot
understand; disasters which they do not
believe to be the results of any fault on their
part.
For many years I was so sensitive
concerning the unseen Guides, whose

presence I had felt, that I carefully avoided
all references to them, in both my writings
and in public lectures. Then, one day in a
conversation with Elmer R. Gates, a
distinguished scientist and inventor, I was
overwhelmed with joy when I learned that
he not only had discovered the presence of
unseen Guides, but he had formed a
working alliance with them which enabled
him to perfect more inventions and procure
more patents than had ever been granted
to the great inventor, Thomas A. Edison.
From that day on I began to make inquiries
of the hundreds of successful men who
collaborated with me in the organization of
the Science of Success and discovered
that each of them had received guidance
from unknown sources, although many of
them were reluctant to admit this discovery.

My experience with men in the upper
brackets of personal achievements has
been that they prefer to accredit their
success to their individual superiority.
Thomas A. Edison, Henry For, Luther
Burbank, Andrew Carnegie, Elmer R.
Gates, and Dr. Alexander Graham Bell
went to great lengths in their descriptions
of their experiences with unseen Guides,
although some of these men did not refer
to these invisible sources of aid as
“guides.” Dr. Bell, in particular, believed the
invisible source of aid was nothing but a
direct contact with Infinite Intelligence,
brought

about

by

the

individual’s

stimulation of his own mind through a
burning desire for the attainment of definite
objectives.

Through the guidance of unseen forces,
Madame Marie Curie was directed to the
revelation of the secret and the source of
supply of radium, although she did not
know in advance where to begin looking for
the radium, or what it would look like if she
found it.
Thomas A. Edison had an interesting view
as to the nature and source of the invisible
forces which he used so freely in his work
of research in the field of invention. He
believed that al thoughts released by al
people at all times are picked up and
become a part of the ether, where they
remain forever, just as they were released
by the individuals; that anyone may tune in
and contact these previously released
thoughts by conditioning the mind, through
definiteness and clearness of purpose, to

contact any desired type of thoughts which
may be related to that purpose. For
example, Mr. Edison discovered that when
he concentrated his thoughts upon an idea
he wished to perfect, he could “tune in” and
pick up from the great reservoir of the
boundless ether thoughts related to that
idea which had been previously released
by others who had thought along the same
line.
Mr. Edison called attention to the fact that
water runs its course, through rivers and
streams, renders a great variety of services
to mankind, and returns finally to the
oceans from which it came, there to
become a part of the main body of water,
where it is cleansed and made ready to
begin its journey all over again. This
coming and going of water, without

diminishing or increasing its quantity, has a
definite parallel in the energy of thought.
Mr. Edison believed that the energy with
which we thinks is a projected portion of
Infinite Intelligence; that this Intelligence
becomes specialized into myriad ideas and
concepts through the brain of man, and
when thoughts are released they return,
like water returns to the oceans, to the
great reservoir from whence the energy
came, and are there filed and classified so
that all related thoughts are arranged
together.
Mr. Edison definitely ruled out the belief of
some who claim that the invisible Guides
are departed people who once lived on
earth. In this decision I fully concur, for I
have never found the slightest evidence

that indicates that people who depart from
the earth ever communicate with those who
are living. In fairness to those who may
believe otherwise, I frankly admit that this
is only my personal opinion; that the
opinion was arrived at, not by evidence, but
for the lack of evidence.
Turning back the pages of history of
civilization, one cannot help but be
profoundly impressed with the fact that
always, when people have been overtaken
by some great crisis which threatened to
destroy the achievements of civilization, a
leader has made his appearance with the
necessary inner wisdom

to provide the

means of survival and continuation of
civilization.

We had evidence that adequate leadership
always appeared in times of great crises
when the British threatened the freedom of
the people of the Colonies in , in the
person of George Washington and his little
army

of

underfed,

underclothed,

undertrained and underarmed soldiers.
We had further evidence when this nation
was being torn apart by inner strife, during
the War Between the States, in the person
of the great leader, Abraham Lincoln.
And we had still further evidence in Word
Wars I and II, when we were compelled to
fight the combined forces of science,
manned by barbarians who were out to
destroy

human

rights

freedom all over the world.

and

personal

In all such cases there always have
appeared

unseen

forces

and

circumstances, which help RIGHT to
prevail over WRONG.
And every individual is born with an
accompanying group of unseen Guides
sufficient to supply all his or her needs, and
with these Guides come definite penalties
for neglect to recognize and use them, also
definite rewards for their recognition and
use. In the main, the rewards consist in the
necessary

wisdom

to

ensure

the

individual’s success in carrying out his
mission in life, whatever that may be, and
to show him the way to the most priceless
of all riches – peace of mind.
Throughout this volume I have described,
through many phrases and illustrations, the

Supreme

Secret

of

all

human

achievements. Those who discover this
secret will receive with it the means of
recognizing and bringing into their service
the unseen Guides which may now lie
dormant, awaiting recognition and the call
to service.
The presence of these Guides, and
evidence of their active service on one’s
behalf,

will

be

recognized

by

the

improvements and benefits which will
begin to manifest themselves from the very
day the Guides receive recognition and are
given definite instructions.
Fantastic and impractical, does someone
exclaim?
No, “miraculous” is a better word, because
no one, so far as I know, has yet explained

the source of these unseen Guides, or how
or why they are assigned to guide the lives
of every living person. But there are
thousands of people among the students of
the Science of Success who know that the
Guides exist because they too have
learned the method – the Supreme Secret
– by which this guidance can be acquired.
The unseen Guides are housed in that
“other self” which every person possesses;
that self which one does not see when
looking into a mirror; that self which does
not recognize the word “impossible,” nor
the limitations of any nature whatsoever;
that self which is the master of al physical
pain, al sorrow, defeat, and temporary
failure.

Somewhere along the way, as you read
this volume, your “other self” may jump out
from behind the lines, where you can
recognize it., if you have not already done
so.
When that point has been reached, turn
down the page and mark it for future
reference, for you will have come to a
profound turning point of your life.
Nowhere

in

these

remarks

am

I

endeavoring to prove anything! I am only
endeavoring to introduce the reader to that
“other self” who, once it has been
recognized, will provide al the proof anyone
could desire. Which is only another way of
saying I am trying to induce the reader to
look “within” for the answer to the riddle of
Life – to THINK for himself!

How to Give Instructions to Your “Other
Self” While You Sleep
The time is nearing when one may treat
physical ailment, master the inferiority
complexes, and condition the mind for any
desired purpose while one is asleep.
Moreover, it will be possible to master any
desired language, and acquire education
on any subject while one sleeps.
These seemingly fantastic achievements
will be attained though the aid of a specially
built phonograph which will play back,
every fifteen minutes while one is asleep,
recordings giving scientifical y prepared
treatments on any subject, for any desired
purpose. The machine has been perfected
so it can be set with a time clock which will
start the record playing after one is asleep.

The reason for this treatment while one
sleeps is this While one is awake the
conscious section of the mind stands guard
at the door through which the subconscious
must be reached, and modifies or rejects
outright, al influences and instructions
which one may endeavor to give the
subconscious. And the conscious mind is a
cynic of no small force. It seems to be more
easily influenced by fear and suspicion and
doubt than it is by positive influences. For
this reason, any directives one desires to
give to the subconscious can best be given
when the conscious mind is asleep and off
duty.
The “other self” can be reached only
through the subconscious mind, and this
irresistible entity with which everyone is
possessed is some mysterious power

associated with, and existing on, the same
plane as our unseen Guides.
This system of sleep treatment is especially
adaptable to the purpose of developing
sound

traits

elimination

of

of

character

and

the

undesirable

habits

in

children, while they sleep, and it can be put
into operation without the knowledge of the
children.
All treatments in preparation for dentistry or
surgical operations must be recommended
by and taken under the supervision of one’s
local physician or dentist.

  The Universal Language of
Pain
The Third Miracle of Life
Physical pain is the universal language in
which Mother Nature speaks to every
creature on earth, and it is understood and
respected by all. I have never known a
normal minded person who did not dread
physical pain. I have never known one who
did not try, in every way possible, to avoid
physical pain. However, pain is one of the
cleverest of nature’s devices, because it is
the means by which she forces individuals
in all degrees of intelligence to observe the
law of self-preservation.
When physical pain calls, the individual
responds and endeavors to remove the
cause. If pain comes in the form of a

headache, the intelligent individual general
y looks for its cause, and quite often finds
that it comes from toxic poisoning through
inadequate elimination. A dose of salts or
an enema gives immediate temporary
relief.
If the less intelligent individual experiences
a headache he is likely to swallow a few
aspirin tablets and say, “There, now, I
guess that will take care of the matter,”
which it usual y does temporarily – not by
correcting the cause, but by temporarily
paralyzing the nerve which is carrying the
warning cry of pain from the source of its
origin to the brain, where something could
and should be done about it.
When nature’s gentler forms of pain fail to
move the individual to heed the call and

look into the cause, nature general y cuts
him down and sends him to bed through a
fortunate spell of sickness, while she gives
him a complete physical repair job. The
more intelligent person never speaks of
sickness as a misfortune, but looks upon it
as a blessing, a sort of merciful form of
largess bestowed upon him by Mother
Nature, through which he is given a new
lease on life instead of a funeral.
Pain and physical ailments are curses only
when they are regarded as such by those
who do not recognize that they are devices
for the good of man, without which no one
could live out the customary three score
and ten years.
When nature hospitalizes an individual,
whether he goes to bed in a hospital or in

his own home, she takes him out of action
so that she may use all of his energies for
self-restoration purposes. Also, she gives
him a much-needed rest and time to
discover the power and usages of his own
mind, as well as engage in meditation and
thought

regarding

the

cause

of

his

ailments. Thus, he may discover that the
cause originated from a variety of sins
which he might have avoided had he
listened to the voice of pain.
Physical il ness is so definitely a blessing
that those who send cards of sympathy to
their sick friends should send cards of
congratulation instead, worded something
like the following
CONGRATULATIONS ON YOUR GOOD
FORTUNE IN HAVING A BLESSED

PERIOD OF REST, ATTENDED BY THE
GREATEAT

OF

ALL

DOCTORS

–

DOCTOR TIME – WHO KNOWS WHAT
YOU NEED AND WILL SEE THAT YOU
RECEIVE IT.
Take this positive attitude toward physical
ailments and observe how well your mental
attitude serves to remove the cause of your
illness. Then you will recognize that
physical pain and illness are blessings,
without which man would not long survive.
Along with the universal language of pain,
nature has ingeniously provided the means
of endurance of the pain, and a stop-gap
when the capacity for endurance has been
reached, in the form of unconsciousness.
When the pain reaches beyond human

endurance one simply goes to sleep, in a
state of unconsciousness.
There are two forms of pain. One is
physical; the other is mental, existing only
in the mind. Most physical pains are greatly
exaggerated by one’s mental reaction to
them.
In dentistry, for example, the pain is
approximately ten percent physical and
ninety percent mental. Most of the suffering
in dentistry occurs in the form of fear,
before the patient is seated in the dentist’s
chair. Modern dental technique has all but
removed the actual physical pain of dental
operations; and modern psychology, as
shown in a subsequent chapter, has wiped
out the mental pain of dentistry.

The mastery of physical pain poses one of
the greatest challenges to those who are
seeking peace of mind through selfdiscipline.

It

provides

an

unexcelled

opportunity for one to take full possession
of his mind, the one thing one must do in
order to make life pay off on his own terms.
Become the master over the appetite, by
following the formula in a subsequent
chapter – put the stomach under complete
control – and mastery of the fear of physical
pain will not be difficult.
The American Indians have always been
without fear of physical pain. Originally,
before the Indians were softened and
corrupted by the coming of the white man,
when they were wounded, they continued
to move around and engage in their daily
labors as though nothing had happened.

Taking their cue from the Indians, may
surgeons now advise patients who have
undergone

certain

types

of

surgical

operations to go back to their daily routine
of living very shortly after surgery. The
surgeon recognizes, and so did the Indians
perhaps, that nature does a wonderful job
of healing when one depends upon her and
learns

how

to

cooperate

with

her

intelligently.
In the mountain sections of the South there
are women who give birth to babies one
day and go back to their housework, or
even to labor in the fields, the following day.
They make no more to-do about childbirth
than many women do about a headache or
a cold; and they know not the fear of
physical pain!

In battles, during war times, it is not
unusual for men to keep on fighting after
being badly wounded, oftentimes without
realizing any pain until after the battle has
ended.
Under the stress of battle the soldier’s mind
is so fully concentrated on the job at hand
that he rises above the fear of physical
pain; therefore, he does not feel pain until
his emotions slow down to normal.
Taking

our

cue

from

the

foregoing

statement of known fact, it should be
obvious that nature has provided us with a
wonderful mechanism with which we may
rise above physical or mental pain, and
master every form of fear, as well as
overcome sorrow and frustration of every
nature. The precise formula through which

this may be accomplished is clearly set
forth in the chapter which describes how
one may prepare the mind for dentistry.
During my forty odd years of experience in
connection with the organization and the
teaching of the Science of Success, I have
had the privilege of coming into close
contact with practically every known type of
human problem and every type of human
being. One of the impressive lessons I
learned from these intimate contacts
consisted in the fact that the more
successful, the truly great people, the
leaders in their chosen fields of endeavor,
had mastered the fear of both physical and
mental pain. Conversely, I observed that
the failures and the never-do-wells were
the victims of the fear of both physical and

mental pain, very often to the point of
superstition.
From this statement of fact, it becomes
apparent that there is a direct and
significant

relationship

between

the

mastery of fear of physical and mental pain
and the achievement of personal success
in one’s calling. And the significance is this
The mastery of physical and mental pain
strongly indicates that one has taken
complete charge of his own mind, this
being the one thing, and the only thing,
over which the Creator provided man with
the privilege of absolute control.
During the course of my research into the
causes of success and failure I conducted
many classes in which were enrolled men
and women in practical y every walk of life.

One of the most remarkable characters I
ever knew was a widow who attended one
of my classes in Washington D.C. She lost
her husband in World War I. Shortly
thereafter she became ill and had to
undergo a major surgical operation. The
first operation was not successful and it
had to be followed by two additional
operations. The expenses of her illness
made it necessary for her to sell her
modest home.
Therefore, when she left the hospital after
the last operation, she had no place to live.
She had two sons who were married, but
neither of the wives would permit her to live
in the homes, even temporarily. She had
one brother and one sister, neither of whom
would

take

care

of

her

convalesced from her il ness.

while

she

Finally, the pastor of the church which she
had previously attended took a hand and
found a neighbor who gave her a
temporary home. It was here that I met this
remarkable woman for the first time, having
been summoned with the hope that I might
help

her

become

self-supporting.

Of

course, this was a charity case and I had
no intention of making any charge for my
services, but I got the surprise of my life
when I told the woman I wished her to
become my student without any charge for
tuition. I consider her reply to my offer a
classic, worthy of quoting here
“You are very kind,” she began, “but I have
always believed there is no such reality as
something for nothing.

“You are a professional man and you earn
your living by teaching other people how to
live properly. Therefore, I shall enter your
class

and

place

myself

under

guidance,

only

with

the

your

distinct

understanding that I am doing so under a
deferred payment arrangement.
“It is true that I have suffered both physical
pain and mental anguish, but I have not quit
fighting; nor have I gone down under these
trying circumstances. I have no financial
means at present, but I do have all the
faculties of my mind, and I intend to use
these faculties, as the Lord intended that I
should, to make myself free from want and
free from all manner of fear.

“I have lost my husband, but so have
thousands of other women, and I am no
better than they.
“My children and my brother and sister
declined to give me a helping hand when I
most needed it, but their refusal has injured
them more than it did me, for it has
deprived them of an opportunity to be
merciful to a helpless person, and still left
open a way by which I may regain my
independence through the use of my own
mind.
“I do not regret the suffering I have gone
through because it has given me the moral
stamina with which I shall gain for myself
freedom in the future.
“And,” she continued, “I do not hold any il
feeling against my family for refusing to

come to my rescue, because their neglect
has

provided

me

with

a

wonderful

opportunity to comply with the Lord’s
admonition to forgive those who injure us
FORGIVE

US

OUR

FORGIVE

THOSE

SINS

WHO

AS

WE

TRESPASS

AGAINST US.
“During the adversities through which I
have passed I have found the seed of an
equivalent benefit. It consists in my
discovery of the power of my own mind and
the means by which that power can be
made the master of sorrow and suffering.
“But the most wonderful benefit I have
received from my adversities consists in my
discovery that suffering, whether it be from
physical pain or mental anguish, places

one in a favorable position for appeal to the
Lord.
“Before my husband was killed, I belonged
to a church!
“After meeting with adversities without
going down under them I have become a
Christian, and I now LIVE MY RELIGION,
INSTEAD OF MERELY ACCEPTING IT
AS SOMETHING TO BELIEVE.
“Truly, in the hour of my greatest suffering
I discovered my own invincible soul!
Therefore, surely you can see why I hold
no grudges against my relatives, for it was
by their neglect more than anything else,
that I was introduced to the powers of my
own mind.

“I do not feel sorry for myself, but I do feel
very sorry for my own flesh and blood
because they were not ready to embrace a
wonderful opportunity to discover the
greatness of their own minds by the
exercise of mercy toward one who had a
right to expect help from them.”
This woman entered my class, mastered
the Science of Success, and later was
appointed by the President of the United
States to one of the highest positions in the
government every held by a woman. Later
she began organizing women employees
of the government in a class, where she
taught them the way to discover their own
minds, using the basis of her instruction the
Science of Success philosophy which
represents all that is known of the
fundamentals of self-determination.

Yes, it took something more than three
major operations, the loss of a husband,
the loss of her financial means, and the
refusal of relatives to come to her aid in her
time of need, to whip this brave woman
who found the path to the source of all
power, through adversity and suffering,
both mentally and physically.
She found that “seed of an equivalent
benefit” which came from her suffering,
solely by her positive mental attitude
toward it!

She discovered the way to

transmute negative circumstances into
positive benefits – a privilege which is the
right of every human being.
Suffering, through physical or mental pain,
disappointments, frustrations, and sorrows,
is the means by which one may become

great or go down in permanent failure. The
determining factor as to which of these two
circumstances one embraces depends
entirely upon one’s mental attitude toward
them. To one person, such as the widow
whose story you have read, they become
stepping-stones to a higher plane of life,
from which one may become the master of
al he surveys.
The story of this widow would not be
complete without the quotation of her
favorite prayer
“I ask not for the over-abundance of
material things, O Lord, but only for the
things I need. And I ask not to be relieved
from sorrow and pain, but only to be shown
how to transmute these into wisdom
through which to adapt myself to the overall

plan and purpose of life on earth. And I ask
for no favor which is not equal y available
to al mankind. Should I be injured by others
I ask only that I may be given the strength
to forgive; that they may be given the
privilege to regret. Lastly, I ask only that I
be guided in all the circumstances of my life
so as to adapt myself to them favorably,
through understanding.”
Times without number, during the forty odd
years I have devoted to the study of human
behavior, I have observed men and women
who found their spiritual estates because of
physical or mental pain.
The greatest woman I have ever known,
my stepmother, spent a large portion of her
later life suffering almost unbearable pain
from arthritis; yet she put into motion an

undertaking which has already benefitted
many mil ions of people and is destined to
benefit yet untold millions, some of them as
yet unborn. She was responsible for my
early training which led eventually to my
being commissioned by Andrew Carnegie
to

give

the

world

its

first

practical

philosophy of personal achievement.
Had my stepmother not been confined to a
wheelchair, no one would have suspected
she was in constant physical pain. Her
voice was always pleasant and she
conversed only in a positive trend of
thought. She never complained, but always
had a word of encouragement for all of us
who lived close to her. I am sure that
anyone who knew her and understood the
extent to which she had mastered physical
pain, would have been utterly ashamed to

have expressed fear of any form of
dentistry or surgery. My stepmother’s
mental attitude toward physical pain was
one of the major factors which made her a
truly great person, loved by al who knew
her, envied by some because of her
profound self-discipline.
Thus. we see, once again, that one’s
mental attitude toward physical pain is the
determining factor which makes pain the
master,

or

merely

something

to

be

transmuted into some form of beneficial
service. Instead of thinking of her own
physical pain and complaining about it, my
stepmother directed her mind to helping
others – particularly members of our family;
and in that way minimized the effects of her
suffering. This might prove a beneficial

suggestion for al who al ow their minds to
dwell upon their own troubles.
And it might be helpful too if those who
have problems they believe are without
solution, were convinced that the best
possible way to solve such problems is to
look around until one finds another person
with a similar or greater problem, and helps
that person find the solution to her own
problem. By this means the negative mind
is

transferred

from

oneself

and

is

transmuted into a positive mind which is
directed for the benefit of others; and the
chances are a thousand to one that by the
time the other fellow’s problem has been
solved one will have found the solution to
his own.

A positive mind is practically an irresistible
power which one may direct to the
attainment

of

any

desired

purpose,

including of course the mastery of both
mental pain and physical pain. Again, may
I remind you a positive mind is also the first
of the Twelve Great Riches of Life.
In a subsequent chapter the formula for the
maintenance of a positive mind is clearly
described. Master that formula, learn to
apply it, and you will no longer fear either
physical pain or mental pain. As a matter of
fact, you will no longer fear anything.
You will no longer bind yourself on a level
of

mediocrity

limitations,

in

by

your

connection

self-imposed
with

your

occupation or any portion of your life. You
will no longer need help from anyone, but

rather you will be in a position to extend
help to many.
Most people condemn themselves to
prison all their lives, despite the fact that
they carry the keys to their prison without
knowing they possess them. The prison
consists in the self-imposed limitations they
set up in their own minds or permit others
to set up for them. The keys consist in the
power everyone has been given by the
Creator to take full possession of the mind
and to direct it to the solution of all
problems,

the

accomplishment

of

all

desired ends.
Those

who

exercise

this

inexorable

prerogative and take full possession of their
own minds, never fear anything, never limit
themselves in the achievement of desired

ends, and they attract to themselves, with
ease, an over-abundance of everything
that represents individual success.
Remember, wherever that old carrion crow
of fear hovers there is something asleep
which needs to be awakened, or something
dead which needs to be buried. It is one of
the strangest anomalies of life that the
absence of fear, and not formal education
or brilliance of mind, is the major cause of
individual success.
Fear, in any form, is not only the major
stumbling block which brings failure in
connection with one’s calling, but fear is
also the major reason why most prayers
bring only negative results. The opposite of
fear is Faith, and Faith is the master of
everything which one does not want, the

means of attaining everything one does
desire.
The only thing which makes it possible for
an individual to rise above the fear of any
physical ailment is for him to recognize that
he has a mind which is without limitations,
except those he himself places upon it.
A little while ago the dentist who made my
dentures was telling another patient of his
how I went through dental surgery and had
all of my teeth extracted without pain or
discomfort. The patient was a clergy man,
yet he expressed doubt that anyone could
do that. I wonder what sort of clergyman he
really is. Most clergyman know that the
power of the mind is without limitation when
it is stimulated by Faith. And all physicians
know that, in most cases, fear hurts the

patient more than the physical ailment with
which he suffers.
May I conjecture that physicians and
dentists will welcome the coming of this
book which teaches how to condition the
mind for dentistry or surgery, so the patient
will be free from fear. The book will be
welcomed because it will lighten the
burdens of the physicians and the dentists
whose patients follow the counsel it
presents, as well as relieve the patients of
the suffering they experience through fear.
While it is true that physical pain is the
universal language in which nature speaks
to all living things, it is also true that with
this language has been provided an
ingenious device to ensure that the
individual can accept the guidance of pain

without going down under it. When physical
pain becomes greater than the individual
can bear, nature puts him to sleep, which
proves once more that nature maintains a
balance in all things, and never permits one
to suffer any form of hurt or discomfort
without providing the means of its cure.
With this important knowledge of nature’s
ways as a starter, doctors have practically
taken the fear of pain out of childbirth,
through a system known as “twilight sleep,”
which reduces the patient to a state of
semi-consciousness. Twilight sleep can be
produced by mild hypodermic injections,
which are without pain, or by treatment
through suggestive therapeutics (partial
hypnosis).

By

the

application

of

hypnosis,

the

conscious mind can be temporarily set
aside and the doctor may then give his
patient

directives

subconscious.

Through

through

the

this

of

form

treatment, the subconscious can be given
any directive which the individual may need
to help him overcome physical pain or any
mental condition that may be causing him
distress, including of course all forms of
fear.
Hypnosis is another of nature’s clever
safeguards which she has provided for the
protection of the individual against both
mental and physical pain, as well as a
means by which the individual may
condition his mind for the attainment of any
desired objective, such as the substitution

of opulence and financial prosperity to
replace poverty.
Auto-suggestion (self-hypnosis) is being
constantly used by al people, at all times,
whether they recognize this fact or not, and
the sad part of this truth is that most people
unconsciously use this powerful device in a
negative way so that it brings them poverty,
ill health, unhappiness, fear and selfimposed

limitations

in

almost

every

conceivable form. This negative application
of autosuggestion takes place when an
individual allows himself to be harassed by
fears and worries which keep his mind on
the circumstances and things he does not
desire.
The positive application of autosuggestion,
through which one fixes his mind on the

circumstances and things he desires, is
more

fully

described

in

subsequent

chapters. The formula by which this end is
attained is simple and always under one’s
direct control.
When autosuggestion is applied by two or
more people who are working in perfect
harmony for the attainment of a definite
purpose, as in the case of a husband and
wife during sexual engagement, the results
often border on the miraculous. As you
progress in reading these chapters, there
are certain important forces available for
your use and benefit with which the author
desires you to become fully familiar.
Some of these are
. Autosuggestion The means by which
one

may

give

directives

to

the

subconscious

mind

for

any

desired

purpose, by the simple procedure of
emotionalizing one’s desires and repeating
them often, as directed in later chapters.
. Transmutation The act of changing one
form, substance or thought into another,
such as the switching of the mind from
thoughts of fear, unhappiness, and poverty
to thoughts of affluence, happiness, and
success. A powerful form of transmutation
may occur when one begins to look for the
“seed of an equivalent benefit” in all
unpleasant circumstances and directs his
mind to the development of that seed
instead of al owing the mind to brood over
the circumstance which produced the
seed.

. The Master Mind An alliance of two or
more minds, in a state of perfect harmony,
for the attainment of definite purposes. The
most profound Master Mind alliance is that
which may exist between a man and his
wife.
. Self-hypnosis Hypnosis is a clever
device, provided by nature, with which one
may condition his mind for the attainment
of any desired end. It is the means by which
the individual may take possession of his
own mind and direct it to either negative or
positive ends. The privilege of control over
the mind is the one and only thing over
which the Creator has given man the
exclusive privilege of control, and autosuggestion, or self-hypnosis, is the means
by which this privilege can be made a curse
or a blessing, according to the way one

adopts and uses it. Self-hypnosis is one of
the major techniques by which the author
has conditioned the minds of mil ions of
people for the attainment of financial
prosperity and peace of mind.
.

Subconscious

The

subconscious

section of the mind consists of a section of
the brain which serves as the sixth sense,
or the gateway to Infinite Intelligence. This
gateway may be opened and used without
limitation, for any desired purpose, through
the aid of the formula presented in a
subsequent chapter. It is by this gateway
that al prayers must be presented. And,
keep in mind always the important fact that
it is through this gateway (which sometimes
is carelessly left open) that the negative
thoughts released by other people may
enter one’s mind and cause failure, worry,

defeat, and both mental and physical
ailments.
The sixth sense, operating through the
subconscious mind, is both a broadcasting
station and a receiving set for the vibrations
of thought, and it is the individual’s
responsibility to safeguard himself against
the negative thoughts of other people
which this receiving set is constantly
picking up, and also to protect other people
by refraining from sending out over this
broadcasting station any thoughts of a
negative nature.
The only safe plan for the advancement of
one’s own welfare and the protection of
others, is that of keeping the mind so busy
broadcasting positive thoughts that no time
is left for sending out negative thoughts, for

it is as true as night follows day, that
whatever thoughts one sends out will come
back greatly multiplied, to bless or to curse.
A great philosopher stated this profound
truth very succinctly when he said
“Whatever you do to or for another, by the
thoughts you send forth, you do to or for
yourself.” Therefore, the best method of
protecting oneself against the inflow of
negative thoughts being released by other
people is that of keeping the broadcasting
station so busy sending out positive
thoughts that no time will be available for
receiving negative thoughts. This formula
is unbeatable; it is practical, and it is under
the control of the individual.
Negative thoughts released by other
people can enter one’s mind, through the

sixth sense, but these can be instantly
transmuted into positive thoughts and
directed through autosuggestion, to the
attainment of the circumstances and things
one may desire. This is the most beneficial
form of thought transmutation known to
man, and one by which the individual may
take full possession of his own mind.
Do not shy away from the terms “autosuggestion” and “self-hypnosis” because
you may not understand them. The simple
truth is that you are constantly using these
principles whether you recognize it or not.
Therefore, instead of using them blindly, to
destructive ends, it is better to embrace
them and use them consciously for the
attainment of desirable ends.

In this principle, which brings so many
people to failure and defeat, consists also
the potentials of triumph and success,
when the principle is understood and
applied with definiteness of purpose.

  Growth Through Struggle
The Fourth Miracle of Life
The necessity for struggle is one of the
clever devices through which nature forces
individuals to expand, develop, progress,
and become strong through resistance.
Struggle can, and does, become either an
ordeal or a magnificent experience through
which the individual expresses gratitude for
the opportunity to conquer the cause of his
struggle.
Life, from birth until death, is literally an
unbroken record of an ever-increasing
variety of struggles, which no individual can
avoid.
Mastery of ignorance calls for struggle.
Education involves eternal struggle, and

every day is commencement day because
education is cumulative. It is a lifetime job.
The

accumulation

of

material

riches

abounds in the necessity for struggle; so
much so in fact that many individuals
actually kill themselves early in life due to
anxiety and over-exertion in the effort to
acquire more money than they need.
Maintenance of sound physical health calls
for eternal struggle with the multifarious
enemies of sound health; struggle for food
and shelter; struggle for an opportunity to
earn a living; struggle to hold a job; struggle
to gain recognition in a profession; struggle
to keep a business out of bankruptcy.
Look in whatever direction we may, and we
find that there is hardly a circumstance of

daily life which does not call for individual
struggle in order to survive.
We are forced to recognize that this great
universal necessity for struggle must have
a definite and useful purpose. That purpose
is to force the individual to sharpen his wits,
arouse his enthusiasm, build up his spirit of
Faith,

gain

definiteness

of

purpose,

develop his power of will, inspire his faculty
of imagination to give him new uses for old
ideas and concepts, and thereby fulfil some
unknown mission for which he may have
been born.
Struggle keeps man from going to sleep
with self-satisfaction or laziness and forces
him onward and upward in the fulfillment of
his mission in life, and he thereby makes
his individual contribution to whatever may

be the Universal Purpose of mankind on
earth.
Strength, both physical and spiritual, is the
product of struggle!
“Do the thing,” said Emerson, “and you
shall have the power.”
Meet struggle and master it, says nature,
and you shall have strength and wisdom
sufficient for all your needs.
If you wish a strong arm, says nature, give
it systematic use under the weight of a
three-pound hammer and soon you will
have muscles like bands of steel. If you do
not wish a strong arm, says nature, tie it in
a sling, take it out of use, and remove the
cause for struggle, and its strength will
wither and die.

In every form of life, atrophy and death
come from idleness! The only thing nature
will not tolerate is idleness. Through the
necessity for struggle and the Law of
Change

nature

keeps

everything

throughout the universe in a constant state
of flux.
Nothing, from the electrons and the protons
of matter to the suns and planets which
float throughout space, is ever still for a
single second. Nature’s motto is Keep
moving or perish! There is no halfway
ground, no compromise, no exceptions for
any reason whatsoever.
And should you doubt that nature intends
every individual to keep struggling or
perish, observe what takes place with the
person who makes his fortune and “retires”

– gives up the struggle because he no
longer believes it is necessary.
The strongest trees are not those in heavily
protected forests, but the trees which stand
in open spaces where they are in constant
struggle with wind and all the elements of
weather.
My grandfather was a wagon maker. In
clearing his land for the production of
crops, he always left a few oaks standing in
the open fields, where they could be
toughened by exposure. These he later cut
and used for the “fellows” needed in
making wagon wheels – timber that could
be bent into arc-shaped segments without
breaking in the process. He found that
trees protected by the forest could not
produce the sort of timber he required. It

was too soft and brittle because it had not
been under the necessity for struggle – and
the self-same reason why some people are
“soft” and unprepared to cope with the
resistances of life.
Most people go through life by the line of
least resistance in every circumstance
where they can make a choice. They do not
recognize that following the line of least
resistance makes all rivers, and some men,
crooked!
There may be some pain in most forms of
struggle, but nature compensates the
individual for the pain in the form of power
and strength and wisdom which come from
practical experience.
While organizing the Science of Success
philosophy, I made the revealing discovery

that all the more successful leaders, in
every calling, in every profession, and
every walk of life, had gained their
leadership in almost exact ratio to the
extent of their struggles in the attainment of
their leadership.
I observed, with profound interest, that no
man, who had not been thoroughly tested
by the necessity of struggle, seemed ever
to have been chosen as a leader in times
of great crises during the interim between
the stone age and our

present-day

civilization.
Careful study of the entire record of
civilization itself, from the age of the cave
man to the present, shows clearly that it is
the product of eternal struggle. Yes,
struggle definitely is one of the Creator’s

devices for forcing individuals to respond to
the Law of Change in order that the overall
plan of the universe may be carried out.
When any individual reconciles himself to
the state of mind wherein he is willing to
accept largess from the government,
instead of supplying his needs through
personal initiative, that individual is on the
road to decay and spiritual blindness.
When a majority of the people of any nation
give up their inherited prerogative right to
make their own way through struggle,
history shows clearly that the entire nation
is in a tailspin of decay that inevitably must
end in extinction.
The individual who not only is willing to live
on the public treasury, but demands that he
be fed from it, is already dead spiritually.

The physical body still walks, but it is only
an empty shell whose only hope for the
future is a funeral. This, of course, has
reference only to able-bodied people who
quit the struggle because they are too
indifferent or too lazy to keep on growing
through the Law of Change and the urge
for struggle.
For twenty odd years I was forced to
struggle

in

mastering

the

problems

incidental to my work in organizing the
world’s

first

practical

philosophy

of

success. First, I was forced to struggle in
preparing myself

with the

necessary

knowledge to produce the philosophy.
Secondly, I was forced to struggle to
maintain myself economical y while doing
the research necessary to organize the
philosophy. Then I met with still greater

necessity

for

struggle

while

gaining

recognition from the world for myself and
the philosophy.
Twenty years of struggle without any direct
financial compensation is an experience
not calculated to give one sustained hope,
but it was the price I had to pay for a
philosophy which was destined to benefit
untold numbers of people, many of whom
were not born when I began my work.
Discouraging? Heartbreaking? Not at all,
for I recognized from the beginning that out
of my struggle would come triumph and
victory in proportion to the labors invested
in my task. In this hope I have not been
disappointed,

but

I

have

been

overwhelmed with the bountiful manner in
which the world has responded and paid

me tribute for the long years of struggle that
went into my work.
Also, I have gained from my struggle
something of still greater and more
profound value. It is recognition that
through my struggles I have reached
deeply into the spiritual wells of my soul,
and there I have found powers available for
every purpose I may desire – powers I
never knew I possessed, and never would
have discovered except by the means of
struggle!
Through my struggles I discovered, and
learned how to make use of, the magical
Eight Princes of Guidance described in a
previous chapter – the unseen friends who
administer to all of my physical, financial,

and spiritual needs, who work for me while
I sleep and while I am awake.
Also, it was through my struggles that the
great Law of Cosmic Habitforce (the law
that is the fixer of all habits, the comptroller
of al natural laws) was revealed to me; the
law which led me, at long last, to where I
was ready to give the world the benefit of
my experiences through struggle.
From my experiences with struggle, I
discovered that the Creator never singles
out an individual for an important service to
mankind without first testing him, through
struggle, in proportion to the nature of the
service he is to render. Thus, through
struggle, I learned to interpret the laws,
purposes, and working plans of the Creator

as they related to me and to mankind in
general.
What greater benefits could anyone desire
from struggle?
What greater rewards could anyone gain
from any other cause?
Briefly we have reviewed only four of Life’s
Miracles, but these are by no means the
more important of the miracles we are to
inspect on our trip through Nature’s
Wonderful Valley.
However, we have witnessed enough on
our trip to convince us that there is good in
all circumstances which touch or influence
our lives, whether they be circumstances
over which we have complete control or
those over which we have no control

except the control of our mental reaction to
them.
As we proceed on our trip, through the
chapters to follow, our minds should unfold
until we recognize that circumstances
which we may regard as unpleasant may
be a part of the Creator’s overall plan in
connection with human destiny on this
earth. The major purpose of this chapter is
to broaden the mind so it may encompass
and envision important facts of life outside
of those which immediately concern the
individual.
Peace of mind is not possible without this
capacity for panoramic vision of the entire
picture and purpose of life. We must
recognize that our individual incarnation,
through which we are tossed into this

material world without ceremony and
without our consent, was for a purpose
above and beyond our individual pleasures
and desires.
Once we understand this broader purpose
of life, we become reconciled to the
experiences of struggle we must undergo
while passing this way, and we accept
them as circumstances of opportunity
through which we may prepare ourselves
for still higher and better planes of
existence than the one on which we now
dwell.

  The Mastery of Poverty
The Fifth Miracle of Life
Poverty is the result of a negative condition
of the mind, which practically every living
person experiences at one time or another.
It is the first and the most disastrous of the
seven basic fears, but it is only a state of
mind, and like the other six fears, it is
subject to the control of the individual.
The fact that a major portion of all people
are born in surroundings of poverty, accept
it as inescapable, and go with it all through
their lives, indicates how portent a factor it
is in the lives of people. It may well be that
poverty is one of the testing devices with
which the Creator separates the weak from
the strong, for it is a notable fact that those
who master poverty, become rich not only

in material things, but also rich and often
wise in spiritual values as well.
I have observed that men who have
mastered poverty invariably have a keen
sense of Faith in their ability to master
practically everything else which stands in
the way of their progress; while those who
have accepted poverty as inescapable
show signs of weakness in many other
directions. In no case have I known anyone
who had accepted poverty as unavoidable,
who had not failed also exercise that great
Gift of the power to take possession of his
own mind-power (as the Creator intended
all people should do).
All people go through testing periods
throughout

their

circumstances,

lives,

which

under

clearly

many
disclose

whether or not they have accepted and
used that Great Gift of exclusive control
over their own mind-power. And I have
observed that along with this Great Gift
from the Infinite go also definite penalties
for neglect to embrace and use the Gift,
and definite rewards for its recognition and
use.
One of the more important rewards for its
use consists in complete freedom from the
entire seven basic fears and all the lesser
fears, with full access to the magic power
of FAITH to take the place of these fears.
The penalties for neglect to embrace and
use this Great Gift are legion. In addition to
all of the seven basic fears, there are many
other liabilities not included with these
fears. One of the major penalties for failure

to use the Great Gift is the total
impossibility of attaining peace of mind.
Poverty has many merits if and when an
individual relates himself to it in a positive
mental attitude instead of submitting to it in
the false belief that it is unavoidable, or the
lazy attitude that it is not worth fighting off.
Poverty may be one of the devices with
which the Creator forces man to sharpen
his wits, arouse his enthusiasm, act on his
personal initiative and make a determined
fight against the forces which oppose him,
in order that he may survive.
Poverty may also be a device of the
Creator by which he manoeuvres man into
a state of mind where he finally discovers
himself from within. In a great country like
the United States of America there is no

valid reason for any able-minded person to
accept and become bound to slavery
through poverty. Here, as nowhere else in
the world, is a training ground for personal
freedom, which offers every individual the
best of all possible opportunities to
embrace and use this Great Gift of the right
to pattern his own earthly destiny and attain
it. And here, as nowhere else, has the
individual

been

provided

with

every

conceivable motive for embracing and
using the Great Gift. The payoff is so great
that the individual may literally “write his
own ticket.”
The best evidence that Destiny smiles on
those who are born to poverty consists in
the well-recognized fact that too seldom
does an individual who is born to great
wealth

ever

contribute

any

worthy

contributions to the world which make it a
better place for mankind. Many children of
very rich people, who never have the
benefit of the seasoning influence of
poverty or struggle, often grow up “soft”
and lacking in the necessary endurance or
the motive to make themselves useful.
When fortune does smile upon a person
who has great wealth, she generally
chooses only those who created their
wealth through useful service – not those
who inherited it or procured it through
means which brought injury to others.
Fortune definitely frowns upon all ill-gotten
wealth, and often causes it to mysteriously
evaporate.
Whether poverty becomes a curse or a
blessing depends entirely upon the way the

individual relates himself to it. If it is
accepted in a spirit of meekness, as an
unavoidable handicap, then it becomes just
that. If poverty is accepted as a mere
challenge to the individual to fight his way
through and master, then it becomes a
blessing – in fact, one of the great miracles
of life. Poverty may become either a
stumbling-block or a stepping-stone on
which he may rise to whatever heights of
achievement he may set his heart upon,
depending entirely on his attitude toward it
and his reactions to it.
Both poverty and riches consist in a state
of mind! They follow precisely the pattern
the individual creates and visualizes by the
dominating thoughts he expresses.

Thoughts of poverty attract their material
counterpart. Thoughts of riches likewise
attract their material counterpart. The law
of harmonious attraction translates al
thoughts

into

their

kindred

material

counterparts. This great truth explains why
the

majority

of

people

experience

unhappiness and poverty throughout their
lives. They al ow their minds to fear
unhappiness

and

poverty,

dominating

thoughts

are

and

their

on

these

circumstances. The law of harmonious
attraction takes over and brings them that
which they expect.
When I was a small boy, I heard a very
dramatic speech on the subject of poverty
which made a lasting impression upon my
mind, and I am sure that speech was
responsible for my determination to master

poverty despite the fact that I had been
born in poverty and had never known
anything except poverty. The speech came
from my stepmother shortly after she came
to our home and took over one of the most
forlorn, poverty-stricken places I have ever
known.
The speech was as follows
“This place which we call home is a
disgrace to all of us and a handicap for our
children. We are all able-bodied people and
there is no need for us to accept poverty
when we know that it is the result of nothing
but laziness or indifference.
“If we stay here and accept the conditions
under which we now live, our children will
grow up and accept these conditions also.
I do not like poverty; I have never accepted

poverty as my lot, and I shall not accept it
now!
“For the moment I do not know what our
first step will be in our break for freedom
from poverty, but this much I do know – we
shall make that break successful, no matter
how long it may take or how many
sacrifices we may have to make. I intend
that our children shall have the advantage
of good educations, but more than this, I
intend that they shall be inspired with the
ambition to master poverty.
“Poverty is a disease which, once it is
accepted, becomes a fixation which is hard
to shake off.
“It is no disgrace to be born in poverty, but
it most decidedly is a disgrace to accept
this birthright as irrevocable.

“We live in the richest and greatest country
civilization

has

yet

produced.

Here

opportunity beckons everyone who has the
ambition to recognize and embrace it, and
as far as this family is concerned, if
opportunity does not beckon us, we shall
create our own opportunity to escape this
sort of life.
“Poverty is like creeping paralysis! Slowly it
destroys the desire for freedom, strips one
of the ambition to enjoy better things of life
and undermines personal initiative.
Also, it conditions one’s mind for the
acceptance of myriad fears, including the
fear of il health, the fear of criticism and the
fear of physical pain.
“Our children are too young to know the
dangers of accepting poverty as their lot,

but I shall see to it that they are made
conscious of these dangers, and I shall see
to it also that they become prosperity
conscious, that they expect prosperity and
become willing to pay the price of
prosperity.”
I have quoted this speech from memory,
but it is substantially what my stepmother
said to my father in my presence shortly
after they were married. That “first step” in
the

break

from

poverty,

which

she

mentioned in her speech, came when my
stepmother inspired my father to enter
Louisville Dental College and become a
dentist, and paid for his training with the life
insurance money she received from the
death of her husband.

With the income from that investment in my
father, she sent her three children and my
younger brother through college and
started each of them on the road to mastery
of poverty.
As for myself, she was instrumental in
placing me in a position where the late
Andrew Carnegie gave me an opportunity
such as no other author ever received – an
opportunity which permitted me to learn
from more than five hundred of the topranking, successful men who collaborated
with me in giving the world a practical
philosophy of personal achievement. A
philosophy based on the “know-how” of my
col arborators, gained from their lifetime
experiences.

While it is estimated that my personal
contribution to posterity has benefitted
many mil ions of people, throughout twothirds of the world, the credit for this
accomplishment really dates back to that
historic speech of my stepmother’s, in
which she disavowed poverty.
We see, therefore, that poverty can be the
means of inspiring one to plan and achieve
profound objectives. My stepmother did not
fear poverty, but she disliked it and refused
to accept it. And somehow the Creator
seems to favor those who know precisely
what they want and what they do not want.
My stepmother was one of that type. If she
had accepted poverty, or had she feared
poverty, the lines you are now reading
never would have been written.

Poverty is a great experience, but it is
something to experience and then master
before it breaks the will to be free and
independent. The person who has never
experienced poverty is to be pitied,
perhaps,

but

the

person

who

has

experienced poverty and has accepted it as
his lot is more to be pitied, for he has
thereby condemned himself to eternal
bondage.
Most of the truly great men and women
throughout civilization have known poverty,
but they experienced it, renounced it,
mastered it and made themselves free.
Otherwise, they never would have become
great. Anyone who accepts from life
anything he does not want is not free. The
Creator has provided everyone with the

means of determining very largely his own
earthly destiny, which consists in the
privilege of freeing himself from those
things which are not desirable.
Poverty can be a profound blessing. It can
also be a lifelong curse. The determining
factor as to which it shall be consists in
one’s mental attitude toward it. If it is
accepted as a challenge to greater effort, it
is a blessing. If it is accepted as an
unavoidable handicap, then it is an
enduring curse.
Remember that the fear of poverty brings
with it a flock of related fears, including the
fear of physical and mental pain.
A story was told of a man who died and
went to hell . During his entrance
examinations Satan asked, “What do you

fear most?” To which the man replied, “I
fear nothing.”
“Then,” returned Satan, “you are in the
wrong place. We accommodate only
customers who are bound by fears.”
Think of it! No place in hell for the person
who has no fears.
I never hear the word “fear” that I do not
think of a story told me by Reuben Darby,
of

the

Massachusetts

Mutual

Life

Insurance Company. When he was a small
lad his uncle operated a grist mill on a
Maryland plantation, on which a tenant
family of Negroes lived. One day a tenyear-old child of the Negro family was sent
down to the mil to request fifty cents of the
plantation owner.

The owner looked up from his work, saw
the Negro child standing at a respectful
distance, and demanded, “What do you
want?” Without moving from her tracks, the
child replied, “My mammy say send her fifty
cents.”
In a threatening tone of voice and a scowl
on his face, the owner of the mill gruffly
answered “I’ll do nothing of the sort! Now
you run on back home, or I will take a
switch to you,” and he continued with his
work.
In a little while he looked up again and saw
the child still standing there. He grabbed a
barrel stave, waved it toward the child, and
said, “If you don’t get out of here, I’ll use
this on you. Now get going before I – “ But
he did not finish the sentence, for by that

time the Negro child darted over in front of
him, stuck her face up toward him, and
screamed at the top of her voice, “My
mammy’s gotta have fifty cents!”
Slowly the mill owner laid down the barrel
stave, reached into his pocket, pulled out
fifty cents, and handed it to the child. She
grabbed the money, quickly backed to the
door, opened it, and then ran like a deer,
while the mil owner stood with wide open
eyes and mouth, pondering hover the
mysterious experience by which a Negro
child had subdued him and got away with it
– something Negroes on his place were not
supposed to do.
Verily, fear can be transmuted into courage
– a fact which the child demonstrated most
convincingly.

Likewise, poverty can be transmuted into
opulence and noteworthy achievements –
a fact which my stepmother dramatically
demonstrated by lifting our family out of
both poverty and despair. She recognized
that no person who takes possession of his
own mind and directs it to definite ends
needs to remain the victim of poverty, or of
anything else he does not desire.
The difference between poverty and riches
is not measurable in money or material
possessions alone. There are twelve great
riches, eleven of which are not material, but
they are closely related to the spiritual
forces available to mankind. In order that
one may get a better idea of how to go
about transmuting poverty into riches, the
twelve great riches are here briefly
described.

The Twelve Great Riches of Life
Grade yourself Perfect, Fair, or Poor
. POSITIVE MENTAL ATTITUDE
A Positive Mental Attitude heads the list of
the Twelve Great Riches, because all
riches, material or otherwise, begin as a
state of mind, the one and only thing over
which

an

individual

has

complete,

inalienable powers of control. One’s mental
attitude supplies the “pulling power” which
attracts to him the material equivalent of al
fears, desires, doubts and beliefs. Mental
attitude is also the factor which determines
whether one’s prayers bring negative or
positive results. It is but little cause for
wonder, therefore, that a Positive Mental
Attitude heads the list of all the great riches
of life.

. SOUND PHYSICAL HEALTH
Sound health begins with a “health
consciousness,” the product of a mind
which thinks in terms of health and not in
terms of il ness, plus temperance and
moderation in eating, and in the balancing
of physical activities. Maintenance of a
Positive Mental Attitude is one of the
greatest forms of prevention of il health
known to mankind. It rates as “great”
because it is under one’s control and is
subject, at al times, to one’s direction to any
desired end.
. HARMONY IN HUMAN RELATIONS
There are two forms of harmony, both of
which are required to entitle harmony to
rank as one of the twelve great riches of
life; namely, harmony with oneself and

harmony

with

responsibility

is

others.

One’s

that

establishing

of

first

harmony within.
This

calls

for the mastery

of fear,

maintenance of a positive mental attitude,
and the adoption of a major purpose in life,
behind which one can build an enduring
faith in its achievement. Be at peace within
your own soul and you will have no difficulty
in relating yourself in a spirit of harmony
with others. Friction in human relations is
often the result of confusion, frustration,
fear, and doubt within the individual who,
oftentimes, mirrors these negative states of
mind in other people, thus making harmony
impossible.
Harmony with others begins with harmony
with oneself, for it is true, as Shakespeare

said, “To thine own self be true, and it must
follow, as the night the day, thou canst not
then be false to any man.” There are great
benefits available to those who comply with
his admonition.
. FREEDOM FROM FEAR
No man enslaved by fear is rich; nor is he
free. Fear is a harbinger of evil, an insult to
the Creator who provided man with the
means of rejecting all whatsoever which
are not desired, by giving man complete
control

over

his

mind-power.

Before

grading yourself on Freedom From Fear,
be sure to probe deeply into your soul and
make certain that not one of the seven
basic fears is hiding within you. And
remember, when these seven basic fears
have been transmutes into faith, you will

have arrived at the point in your life where
you can take possession of your own mind,
and through that possession acquire all you
desire in life, as well as reject all you do not
desire. Without this Freedom From Fear,
the other eleven riches of life may be
useless.
In a subsequent chapter you will find the
formula by which you can conquer the fear
of ill health and physical pain. Apply the
formula and conquer this fear; then follow
through and conquer the other six basic
fears with the same formula.
.

THE

HOPE

OF

FUTURE

ACHIEVEMENT
Hope is the forerunner of the greatest of all
states of mind, Faith! Hope sustains one in
times of emergency when, without it, fear

would take over. Hope is the basis of the
most profound form of happiness which
comes from the expectancy of success in
some, as yet unattained, plan or purpose.
Poor indeed is the person who cannot look
toward the future with the hope that he will
become the person he would like to be or
attain the position he would like to hold in
life or attain the objective he has failed to
acquire in the past. Hope keeps the soul of
man alert and active in his behalf and
clears the line of communication by which
Faith

connects

one

with

Infinite

Intelligence. Hope is a right royal person
and the Divine Decorator of the other
eleven riches of life.
. THE CAPACITY FOR FAITH

Faith is the means of communication
between the conscious mind of man and
the great universal reservoir of Infinite
Intelligence. It is the fertile soil of the
garden of the human mind, wherein may be
produced al the riches of life. It is the
“eternal elixir” which gives creative power
and action to the impulses of thought. It is
the é lan vital of the soul and it is without
limitations. Faith is the spiritual quality
which, when mixed with prayer, gives one
direct and immediate connection with
Infinite Intelligence. Faith is the power
which transmutes the ordinary energies of
thought into their spiritual equivalent, and it
is the only means by which Infinite
Intelligence may be appropriated to the
uses of man.

. WILLINGNESS TO SHARE ONE’S
BLESSINGS
He who has not learned the blessed art of
sharing his blessings with others has not
found the true path to enduring happiness,
for happiness comes mainly from sharing
of oneself and one’s blessings. Let it be
remembered that the space one occupies
in the hearts of others is determined
precisely by the service he renders through
some form of sharing. Let it also be
remembered that all riches may be
embellished and multiplied by the simple
process of sharing them where they may
serve others.
Neglect or refusal to share one’s blessings
is a sure way to cut the line of
communication between a man and his

soul. A great teacher said, “The greatest
among you is he who becomes the servant
of all.” Another philosopher said, “help they
brother’s boat across, and lo! Thine own
hath reached the shore.” And still another
great philosopher said, “Whatsoever you
do to or for another, you do to or for
yourself.”
. LABOR OF LOVE
There can be no richer man than he who
has found a labor of love and is busily
engaged in performing it, for a labor of love
is the highest form of expression of human
desires. Labor is the liaison between the
demand the supply of all human needs, the
forerunner of all human progress, the
medium by which the imagination of man is
given wings of action. And all labor of love

is sanctified because it brings joy of selfexpression to him who performs it. Do the
thing you like best and your life will be
thereby

enriched,

your

soul

will

be

embellished and you will be an inspiration
for hope and faith and encouragement to
all with whom you come into contact.
Engagement in a labor of love is the
greatest of all cures for melancholy,
frustration and fear. And it is a builder of
physical health without equal.
. AN OPEN MIND ON ALL SUBJECTS
Tolerance, which is among the higher
attributes of culture, is expressed only by
the person who holds an open mind on all
subjects, toward all people, at all times.
And only the person who maintains an
open mind becomes truly educated and is

thus prepared to embrace and use the
twelve great riches of life. A closed mind
atrophies

and

cuts

off

the

line

of

communication between an individual and
Infinite Intelligence.
An open mind keeps the individual eternally
in the process of education and the
acquisition of knowledge with which he
may take possession of his mind and direct
it to the attainment of any desired purpose.
. SELF-DISCIPLINE
The person who is not the master of himself
may never become the master of anything
outside of himself. He who is the master of
self may become the master of his own
earthly destiny and the “Master of his Fate,
the Captain of his Soul.” The highest form
of self-discipline consists in the expression

of humility of the heart when one has
attained great riches or has been blessed
with widespread recognition for services
rendered.
Self-discipline is the only means by which
one may take full and complete possession
of his own mind and direct it to the
attainment of whatsoever ends he may
wish.
. THE CAPACITY TO UNDERSTAND
PEOPLE
The

person

who

is

rich

in

the

understanding of people recognizes that all
people are fundamentally alike, in that they
have evolved from the same stem; that all
human activities, good or bad, are inspired
by one or more of the nine basic motives of
life, namely

(a) The emotion of LOVE
(b) The emotion of SEX
(c) The desire for MATERIAL GAIN
(d) The desire for SELF-PRESERVATION
(e) The desire for FREEDOM OF BODY
AND MIND
(f) The desire for PERPETUATION OF
LIFE AFTER DEATH
(g) The emotion of ANGER
(h) The emotion of FEAR (See the seven
basic fears)
The man who would understand others
must first understand himself, for the
motives which inspire him to action are, in
the main, the same motives which would

inspire others to action under the same
conditions.
The capacity to understand others is the
basis of al friendships; it is the basis of al
harmony and cooperation among people
and

the

fundamental

of

greatest

importance in all forms of leadership which
call for friendly cooperation. Some people
believe it is an approach of major
importance in the understanding of the
overall plan of the universe and the Creator
thereof.
Know yourself and you will be well on the
road to understanding others.
. ECONOMIC SECURITY (Money)
The last, but not the least in importance, is
the tangible portion of the twelve great

riches, money, or the knowledge with which
to ensure one’s economic security.
Economic security is not attained by the
possession of money alone. It is attained
by the service one renders, for useful
service may be converted into all forms of
human needs, with or without the use of
money.
Henry Ford attained economic security, not
necessarily because he accumulated a
vast fortune in money, but for the better
reason

that

he

provided

profitable

employment for millions of men and
women, as well as dependable automobile
transportation for still greater numbers of
people.
Men and women who master and apply the
Science

of

Success

have

economic

security because they possess the means
by which money can be acquired. They
may run out of money, or lose it through
poor judgment, but this does not deprive
them of economic security, because they
know the source of money and how to
contact and benefit by that source.
Andrew Carnegie, who was perhaps the
richest man in the world of his time,
sponsored the organization of the Science
of Success because he believed that the
“know-how” of the accumulation of money
should be known to everyone. During the
latter portion of his life, Andrew Carnegie
gave away most of his vast fortune of
almost

a

billion

dollars,

but

in

a

conversation with me shortly before he
died, he said

“I have given most of my fortune back to the
people from whence it was accumulated,
but the money I have given away is
infinitesimally small in comparison with the
riches I am leaving to the people in the
“know-how” of success, which I have
entrusted to you for delivery to the world.”
You now have an understanding of the
antithesis of poverty in the twelve great
riches of life. And it should be encouraging
to observe that the first eleven of those
riches are within the reach of all who will
embrace them; and those who do embrace
and use them will easily attract the twelfth
of the riches, money.
Here, then, is the means by which poverty
may be transmuted into riches, including al
twelve of the great riches of life.

Embrace the twelve great riches, apply
them in your daily life and you will become
a success – for success is nothing more
nor less than the attainment of these twelve
blessings.

  Failure May Be a Blessing
The Sixth Miracle of Life
Failure often becomes a blessing in
disguise, because it turns people back from
contemplated purposes which, had they
been carried out, would have meant
embarrassment or even total destruction.
Failure

often

opens

new

doors

of

opportunity and provides one with useful
knowledge of the realities of life, through
the trial-and-error method. Failure often
reveals the methods which will not work
and cures vain people of their conceits.
Failure of the British armies under Lord
Cornwallis in  not only gave the
American Colonies their freedom, but
probably saved the British Empire from
total destruction in World Wars I and II.

The economic failures of the South, due to
the loss of their slaves in the Civil War,
eventually

yielded

the

seed

of

an

equivalent benefit in more ways than one
. The loss of slaves forced people to begin
depending upon themselves and thereby
they developed personal initiative.
. The loss forced the women of the South
to become independent by taking their
places alongside of men in business and in
the professions.
. And, at long last, American industry is
rapidly moving southward, where labor,
raw materials, fuel and weather conditions
are more favorable. Thanks to the personal
initiative of the Southerners, they stopped
hating the Yankees and began to seek the
South to northern industry.

In due time the South may become the
industrial center of the United States.
Dr. Alexander Graham Bel spent years of
research looking for the means of creating
a mechanical hearing aid for his hard-ofhearing wife. In his original purpose he
failed, but the research yielded the secret
of the long-distance telephone.
When radio first came into popularity, about
, the Victor Talking Machine Company
became frightened because it appeared
that radio would ruin the talking machine
business. The chief engineer of the Victor
Talking Machine Company discovered, in
the principle of radio itself, the means by
which better recordings could be made and
from that discovery was born a demand for
talking machines, such as the company

never would have known without the
discovery.
Thomas A. Edison’s first major failure came
when his teacher sent him home from
school with a note advising his parents that
he could not take an education. This so
shocked Edison that he acquired an
education with enabled him to become a
truly great inventor.
Also, Edison’s partial deafness might have
been considered by some as a failure of
major proportions, but he adapted himself
to it in such a way that he developed the
power to hear “from within,” through his
sixth sense. This was a strong factor
perhaps in his ability to uncover so many of
nature’s
inventing.

secrets

in

his

business

of

The loss of my mother, who died when I
was a very young lad, would have been
considered by some people a handicap of
major proportions, but it turned out
differently. I was compensated for the loss
of my mother with a stepmother whose
influence upon me was so profound that
she inspired me to engage in a calling
whereby I have been able to serve others
to a far greater extent that I might otherwise
have done.
I felt that I had met with a major failure
when a great uncle who was a multimillionaire (after whom I was name) died
and left no portion of his fortune to me. I
later had reason to be thankful I was left out
of his will, for it became necessary for me
to master poverty on my own account,
though my own initiative , and in doing so I

learned the way to teach others how to
master poverty.
Analyze

failure

under

whatsoever

circumstances you choose and you will
discover the profound truth that every
failure brings with it the seed of an
equivalent benefit.
This does not mean that failure brings with
it the full ripened fruit of an equivalent
benefit, but only the seed which must be
discovered, germinated and developed to
fruition through one’s personal initiative,
imagination and definiteness of purpose.
Most men would consider the loss of the
use of their legs a failure of major
proportions, but Franklin D. Roosevelt so
related himself to such a loss that it gave
him a determined spirit to get along with

braces and he seemed to have done very
well for himself without the use of his legs.
His mental attitude toward his affliction was
such that he reduced his handicap to a
minimum of inconvenience.
The

failures

of

Abraham

Lincoln

in

storekeeping, surveying, soldiering and the
practice of law, turned his talents in a
direction which prepared him to become
the greatest President the United States
has ever known.
More than twenty major failures which I
experienced during the early part of my
career changed my path and guided me
eventually into a field in which I can best
serve others.
Clarence Saunders’ failure as a store clerk
yielded him an idea from which he made a

profit of four million dollars in four years.
That idea was the Piggly-Wiggly System of
self-help grocery stores, which marked the
beginning of the self-help store system now
in operation on a widespread scale
throughout the country.
Failure in physical health often diverts
attention of the individual from his physical
body to his brain power and introduces him
to the real “boss” of the physical body – the
mind – and opens wide horizons of
opportunity which he never would have
known without the failure of health.
Milo C. Jones of Fort Atkinson, Wisconsin,
made a bare living from his farm until he
was stricken with paralysis and suffered
total loss of the use of his body. Then he
made a discovery which only such an

affliction could have uncovered for him. He
discovered that he had a mind and its
possibilities of achievement were limited
only by his desires and demands upon it,
even without the use of his physical body.
Through the aid of his mind, he conceived
the idea of making sausage from young
hogs, named his product “Little Pig
Sausage,” and lived to become a multimillionaire.
The fact that Mr. Jones did not discover his
fabulous source of riches while he had the
full use of his physical body is something
which provides food for profound thought.
The great Law of Change had to throw Milo
C. Jones flat on his back and break up his
old habits, by which he earned his living
with his hands, in order to introduce him to

his brain power, which he discovered to be
infinitely greater than his brawn power.
Verily, nature never permits an individual to
be deprived of any of his inborn rights and
blessings without providing him with the
potentials of an equivalent benefit in some
form, as in the case of Milo C. Jones.
Failure is a blessing or a curse, depending
upon the individual’s reaction to it. If one
looks upon failure as a sort of nudge from
the Hand of Destiny which signals him to
move in another direction, and if he acts
upon

that

signal,

the

experience

is

practically sure to become a blessing. If he
accepts failures as an indication of his
weakness and broods over it until it
produces an inferiority complex, then it is a
curse. The nature of the reaction tells the

story, and this is under the exclusive
control of the individual always.
No one has complete immunity against
failure and everyone meets with failure
many times during a lifetime, but everyone
also has the privilege and the means by
which he can react to failure in any manner
he pleases.
Circumstances over which one has no
control may, and they sometimes do, result
in failure, but there are no circumstances
which can prevent one from reacting to
failure in a manner best suited for his
benefit.
Failure is an accurate measuring device by
which an individual may determine his
weaknesses; and it provides therefore an

opportunity for correcting them. In this
sense failure always is a blessing.
Failure usually affects people in one or the
other of two ways It serves only as a
challenger to greater effort or it subdues
and discourages one from trying again.
The majority of people give up home and
quit at the first signs of failure, even before
it overtakes them. And a large percentage
of people quit when they are overtaken by
a single failure. The potential leader is
never subdued by failure but is always
inspired to greater effort by it. Watch your
failures and you will learn whether you
have potentialities for leadership. Your
reaction will give you a dependable clue.
If you can keep on trying after three failures
in a given undertaking you may consider

yourself a “suspect” as a potential leader in
your chosen occupation. If you can keep on
trying after a dozen failures the seed of a
genius is germinating within your soul.
Give it the sunshine of Hope and Faith and
watch

it

grow

into

great

personal

achievements.
It appears that nature often knocks
individuals down with adversities in order to
learn who among them will get up and
make another fight! Those who make the
grade are chosen as people of destiny, to
serve

as

leaders

in work

of

great

importance to mankind.
May I remind you that the next time you
meet with failure, if you will remember that
every failure and every adversity carries
with it the seed of an equivalent benefit,

and start where you stand to recognize that
seed and begin to germinate it through
action, you may discover that there never
is any such reality as failure until one
accepts it as such!
It would have been most natural and logical
for Milo C. Jones to have accepted his
affliction as a knockout blow from which he
never would recover, and no one would
have blamed him if he had done so, but he
reacted to his handicap in a positive
manner which yielded him a better working
relationship with the power of his mind.
His reaction was the important part of the
experience, because it paid off in terms of
financial riches such as he had never
dreamed of acquiring.

Most so-called failures are only temporary
defeats which can be converted into assets
of a priceless nature if one takes a positive
mental attitude toward them.
From birth until death, Life poses a
constant challenge to people to master
failure without going down for the count and
rewards with bountiful opulence and great
personal powers those who successfully
meet the challenge.
The world generously forgives one for his
mistakes and temporary defeats, provided
always he accepts them as such and keeps
on trying, but there is no forgiveness for the
sin of quitting when the going is hard!
Life’s motto is “A WINNER NEVER QUITS
AND A QUITTER NEVER WINS!”

Japan’s failure in World War II was her
greatest victory, since that failure broke the
vicious yoke of superstition by which the
Japanese people had been bound and
gave them their first taste of democracy
and an opportunity to take their place in the
family of civilized peoples on an equality
with all others.
In all human endeavors nature seems to
favor the “fool” who did not know he could
fail, but who went ahead and did the
“impossible”

before

he

discovered

it

couldn’t be done.
Henry P. Kaiser had never built seaworthy
ships, but the emergency of World War II
called for more ships than the established
ship-building sources could supply, so Mr.

Kaiser began building ships with such faith
and enthusiasm that he literally “ran rings”
around some of the older and more
experienced men in that business, with an
al -time high in production and all-time low
in cost!
The man who says “it can’t be done”
usually winds up under the feet of the man
who is busy doing it – the man who
succeeds because he has thrown himself
in the path of the laws of the universe and
adapted himself to their habits, and thereby
insured himself against failure. The man
who says “it can’t be done” has never
studied nature’s laws.
An old miner spent thirty years in search of
precious

metals,

only

to

meet

with

disappointment and despair until he was

overtaken by the misfortune of having his
trusty mule break its leg in a gopher hole.
The mule had to be shot. While digging a
hole in which to buy the animal the miner
struck the richest copper deposit in the
entire world!
Destiny often selects dramatic ways in
which to reward people for stick-toitiveness and the will to keep on trying in
the face of defeat.
In this world of practical realism, one must
constantly remind himself that our only
limitations are those which we set up in our
minds or permit others to establish for us.
Henceforth and forever remember that no
experience can be classified as a failure
unless and until it has been accepted as
such! Remember also, that only the person

who meets with a given experience has the
right to call it a failure, or some other name;
that the verdict of all others is ruled out.
Fifty-Four Major Causes of Failure
. The habit of drifting with circumstances,
without definite aims of purposes.
. Unfavorable physical heredity at birth.
. Meddlesome curiosity in connection with
other people’s affairs.
. Lack of a Definite Major Purpose as a life
goal.
. Inadequate schooling
. Lack of self-discipline, which general y
manifests itself through excesses in eating,
drinking

and

sex

indulgence

and

indifference toward opportunities for selfadvancement.
.

Lack

of

ambition

to

aim

above

mediocrity.
. Il health, general y due to wrong thinking,
improper diet and lack of physical exercise.
(Keep in mind, however, that some people,
such

as

Helen

Keller,

have

made

themselves of great service to others
despite incurable ailments).
. Unfavorable environmental influences
during childhood. It has been said that the
major fundamentals of character have
been well formed in the individual by the
time he is seven years of age.
. Lack of persistence in carrying through
to a finish that which one starts.

. A negative mental attitude as a fixation
of habit.
. Lack of control over the emotions of the
heart.
. Desire for something for nothing,
usually expressed in the habit of gambling.
. Failure to reach decisions promptly and
definitely and to stand by them after they
have been made.
. One or more of the seven basic fears.
. Wrong selection of a mate in marriage.
.

Over-caution

in

business

professional relationships.
. Lack of all forms of caution.

and

. Wrong choice of associates in business
or professional pursuits.
. Wrong selection of a vocation, or total
neglect to make a choice.
. Lack of concentration of effort on the
task at hand at a given time.
. Habit of indiscriminate spending,
without a budget control over income and
expenditures.
. Failure to budget and use TIME to best
advantage.
. Lack of controlled enthusiasm.
. Intolerance – a closed mind based
particularly on ignorance or prejudice in
connection with religious, political and
economic subjects.

. Failure to cooperate with others in a
spirit of harmony.
. The possession of power or wealth not
based on merit or not earned.
. Lack of the spirit of loyalty to those to
whom loyalty is due.
. Egotism and vanity not under control.
. Habit of forming opinions and building
plans without basing them on first-hand
knowledge of the necessary facts.
. Lack of vision and imagination sufficient
to recognize favorable opportunities.
. Unwillingness to go the extra mile in
rendering service.
. The desire for revenge for real or
imaginary injuries by others.

. The habit of conversing in terms of
vulgarity or profanity.
. The habit of indulging in negative
gossip about the affairs of other people.
.

Unsocial

attitude

toward

one’s

constituted authorities of government.
. Unbelief in the existence of Infinite
Intelligence.
. Lack of knowledge of how to engage in
prayer so as to bring positive results.
. Failure to benefit by the counsel of
others whose experience one often needs.
. Carelessness in payment of personal
debts.
. The habit of lying or unduly modifying
the truth.

. The habit of offering criticism where it
has not been invited.
. Over-extension in connection with the
incurring of indebtedness.
. Greed for material possessions one
does not need.
. Lack of self-confidence of adequate
proportions for the fulfillment of one’s
chosen objectives.
. Alcoholism or narcotics.
. Over-indulgence in smoking, especially
the chain-smoking cigarette habit.
. The habit (of laymen) of serving as their
own lawyers in connection with contracts
and legal matters.

. The habit of endorsing other people’s
notes when the risk is not justified.
. The habit of procrastination – putting off
until tomorrow that which should have been
attended to the day before yesterday.
. The habit of running away from
unpleasant

circumstances

instead

of

mastering them.
. The habit of talking too much and
listening too little. One never learns
anything while talking, but always is in the
way of learning by listening when others
talk.
. The habit of accepting favors from
others without reciprocating.
. Intentional dishonesty in business and
professional relations.

Check yourself carefully by these fifty-four
causes of failure and should the selfexamination reveal that you can check O.K.
after each of the causes, it is not likely you
will ever be overcome by failure. Moreover,
if you can check yourself O.K. after each of
these causes of failure you need not worry
over dental or surgical operations, for you
have everything under control.
After you make your own rating, however,
it may be both interesting and helpful if you
will have some other person rate you on
each of these causes of failure – someone
who knows you quite well and has the
courage to let you look at yourself through
his or her eyes.

  Sorrow The Path to the Soul
The Seventh Miracle of Life
Sorrow is never invited by individuals, but it
is one of the more effective devices of
nature through which human beings are
conditioned

to

become

humble

and

cooperative in human relationships.
When a person who has known great
sorrow is tempted to criticize or condemn
those with whom he may not agree, or
those who may have injured him, he often
reverses

the

general

circumstances,

and,

rule

in

such

instead

of

condemning says
“God pity us all!” When we meet this type
of person, we intuitively recognize that we
are in the presence of royalty!

Sorrow is medicine for the soul, without
which the soul would never be recognized
by many. Without the leavening influence
of sorrow man would still be on the same
stem with the animals on the lower plane of
intelligence. Sorrow breaks down the
barriers which stand between physical man
and his spiritual potentialities.
Sorrow breaks up old habits and replaces
them with new and better habits – a fact
which suggests that sorrow is a device of
nature by which she keeps man from
becoming enslaved by complacency and
self-satisfaction.
Through my one and only great sorrow I
discovered the path to my own soul, which
gave me freedom I would never have

known without this experience and paved
the way for the writing of this book.
Sorrow is closely akin to the emotion of
love – the greatest of all the emotions – and
during times of disaster sorrow brings
people together in a spirit of friendship and
influences man to recognize the blessings
of becoming his brother’s keeper.
Sorrow softens poverty and embellishes
riches!
The riches which are revealed only by
sorrow are so great and so varied that
inventory of them is impossible. The
capacity

for

sorrow,

within

itself,

is

evidence of one’s deep spiritual qualities.
Knaves never know the emotion of sorrow,
for if they knew sorrow they would not be
knaves.

Sorrow forces man to take introspective
inventory of himself, wherein he may
discover the cure for all of his ills and
disappointments. And it introduces one to
the benefits of meditation and silence,
during which unseen forces may bring aid
and comfort sufficient unto one’s needs at
a given time or experience.
When a man comes to himself and
discovers the stupendous powers within
his command, the revelation usual y is of a
loved one, failure in business, or some
physical affliction beyond his control.
There are certain necessary refinements of
body and benefits growing out of it, then it
may become a curse. The choice is entirely
in the mind of the individual.

Sometimes sorrow becomes self-pity and
as such it serves only to weaken the one
who so embraces it. Sorrow is beneficial
only when it is experienced as an emotional
feeling of sympathy for others or accepted
by the individual as a welcome medium of
discipline.
One is never in closer contact with Infinite
Intelligence than in times of deep sorrow. It
is in times of sorrow that prayer is most
effective and often the prayer brings
positive results instantly.
Sorrow has revealed to the world geniuses
who never would have been recognized
except for its deep, soul-searching effects.
Abraham Lincoln’s sorrow over the loss of
the only woman he ever truly loved, Ann
Rutledge, revealed to the world his great

soul and gave him to America as our
greatest leader in times of our direst need.
Frustration, brought about by unrequited
love, often brings one to a turning-point in
life at which sorrow makes its appearance
and

serves

as

a

guide

to

great

achievements, or a hindrance which may
bring total destruction, according to the way
the individual relates himself to it.
Here again the choice is entirely with the
individual!
Not even the Creator will abrogate one’s
privilege of controlling his own mind and
directing it to whatever ends he may
choose and no other power can cancel this
privilege
individual.

except

by

consent

of

the

Sorrow may become a mighty power for
good when it is transmuted into some sort
of

constructive

action

or

personal

reformation. Sorrow has been known to
cure one of the disease of alcoholism after
everything else has failed. And it is
recognized as a cure for most of the sins of
man. Someone has said, “When sorrow
fails the Devil takes over.”
In times of sorrow people throw off al
devices of pretense and reveal themselves
as they are, for sorrow is an hour for open
confession of both the humble and the
proud.
Without the emotion of sorrow man would
be an animal as ferocious as the wildest
tiger

and

infinitely

more

dangerous

because of his superior intelligence.

In lifting man to the highest plane of
intelligence, the Creator wisely refined that
intelligence with a capacity for sorrow to
insure man’s moderation in the use of his
superiority. Sadists and master criminals
usually are individuals of great intelligence
who lack the capacity for sorrow.
A man without the capacity for sorrow is the
nearest thing to a Devil in the flesh.
If you should ever feel that your sorrows
are greater than you can bear, remember
you are at the crossroads of life, with four
directions from which to choose, one of
which may lead you to peace of mind which
you would never have found in any other
direction,

or

by

any

other

means.

Remember also that the person who has
never felt the hand of sorrow has never

really lived, for sorrow is the Master-Key to
the gateway of one’s soul – the port of
entrance to Infinite Intelligence.
Sorrow is a stop-gap, a sort of safety valve,
which protects those who refuse to heed
the guidance of their faculty of reason.
Sorrow is a tonic to great souls, a bludgeon
to the weak and the undisciplined.
I graduated in the University of Sorrow at
the age of fifty. From birth until I reached
the age of fifty, I had met about every type
of

sorrow

one

can

experience

and

somehow I had triumphed over all of these.
All my rivers of sorrow had been crossed
except one, which proved to be the last and
the greatest of them all. This was a new
sort of sorrow against which I had not built
a wall of immunity. It involved the most

profound and yet the most dangerous of
the emotions – the emotion of love.
I had wandered into the Garden of Love by
a path which proved to be a labyrinth over
which I found it difficult to back-track. I had
seen hundreds of my students make this
same mistake and always I had felt
something only slightly less than contempt
for them because of their weakness. Now
the shoe was on the other foot.
At long last I knew the sorrow of unrequited
love and I knew also that I had to find a way
to transmute this experience into some
form of constructive action. With this
experience, as with all previous unpleasant
experiences, I began the transmutation by
setting for myself a work task which left me
no time for regrets.

By some strange move of the Hand of Fate
I was guided to the little town of Clinton,
South Carolina, where I settled down to
overcome my sorrow and rewrite the
Science of Success – a task which required
over a year. In the apartment where I lived
alone was an oil painting of a beautiful
forest, through which flowed a wide river
that faded from sight at a sharp bend which
changed the river’s course.
Night after night I sat in front of that
painting, waiting and watching for the Ship
of Hope to sail around the bend. The ship
never came and the days turned into
weeks, the weeks into months, which found
me alone with myself. I had always
managed to escape from every other
unpleasant circumstance of my life, but
here

I

was

seemingly

inseparably

imprisoned with myself and the boredom
seemed greater than I could endure.
I was destined to learn from this experience
one of the greatest lessons of my career,
namely, that man is not complete without
the companionship of the woman of his
choice. I could have learned the lesson in
no other way.
One evening, after I had been living alone
for a year, I was dressing for a dinner
engagement and the lights of my apartment
were low. I happened to glance at the
painting on the wall and by some strange
phenomenon, due to the faint light falling
on the picture, I saw a perfect picture of a
ship coming around the bend. “My Ship of
Hope at last!” I exclaimed.

As I sat across the table from my dinner
guest that evening, I made another
discovery which clearly revealed to me why
I had been guided to the little town of
Clinton, for there in front of me sat my
future wife – the one for whom I had been
searching hither and yon, not knowing that
she lived almost next door to me.
So, out of my greatest sorrow, the eternal
law of compensation yielded to me the
greatest of all my riches – a wife perfectly
suited in every way to walk arm in arm with
me down through the afternoon of life,
while we work together putting on the
finishing touches of a career through which
sorrow has been transmuted into a
philosophy destined to benefit millions of
people.

But the payoff never would have come, the
Science of Success philosophy never
would have been organized, had I not
learned the blessed art of transmuting
unpleasant circumstances into constructive
action.
Remember this word “transmute” when you
sit in a dentist’s chair again and keep your
mind so busily engaged in thinking of
something constructive that no time will be
left for you to feel physical pain. And when
sorrow overtakes you, follow the same plan
by turning your thoughts toward the
attainment of some as yet unattained
purpose; keep it so busy thinking of ways
and means of attaining that purpose that no
time will be left for self-pity. Do this and you
will discover a hidden asset you did not
know you possessed – an asset worth

more than a king’s ransom. You will
discover that you are the master of
yourself!
I know something of the effects of sorrow
because I was born in the midst of oceans
of it. The home in which I was born was a
one-room

log

cabin

located

in

the

mountains of southwest Virginia and the
total assets of that home at the time of my
birth consisted of one horse, one cow, one
bed and an oven in which my mother baked
corn bread.
Theoretically, I had not the ghost of a
chance of ever becoming a free man and
less of a chance of ever becoming of
service to my fellowmen throughout the
world. My parents were poor and they were
il iterate. The only asset of value which I

inherited at birth was a sound physical
body and a healthy blood stream.
From

this

brief

description

of

my

background, you may wonder why I was
chosen to give the world its first practical
philosophy of personal success. I have
often wondered about that myself! But the
philosopher tells us that “God moves in a
mysterious way His wonders to perform.”
Out of the sorrows of my childhood came a
passionate desire to lessen the sorrows of
others – a desire so strong and enduring
that it carried me through more than twenty
years of profitless research into the causes
of success and failure. Perhaps the
sorrows of my youth were sent my way with
a purpose, in order that I might be inspired
to render the world useful service.

When I say “profitless research” I mean, of
course,

profitless

in

monetary

compensation while the research was in
progress. As to the ultimate compensation
which this research yielded me, I can
sincerely say I doubt if any other author
ever had as much help or as favorable an
opportunity to carry on any sort of literary
work as I had during those twenty years,
while the Science of Success was being
organized. At long last those “profitless”
years helped me project my influence for
good into countless lives and yielded to me
personally more than my share of the
Twelve Great Riches which represent all
there is in personal success on this earthly
plane.
If I could go back and live my life over
again, would I avoid those sorrows of my

youth? No, definitely I would not, for it was
those experiences which tempered my
body and mind and refined my soul for a
task in life which has resulted to the benefit
of others who are struggling to find their
way through the Black Forest of the Jungle
of Life.
Get the full significance of the thought I am
here trying to convey and you will
understand why I stated that this volume
would be something profoundly greater
than the mere instructions on how to
master the fear of dentistry or surgical
operations. If I do my work as I have hoped
I might do it, in writing this volume, it will
introduce the reader to a source of power
with which all unpleasant circumstances
can be transmuted into helpful service – a
source of power which operates through

that “other self” which one does not see
when looking into a mirror.
Once you learn to properly evaluate sorrow
you will recognize its benefits whenever
they appear and you will understand it is
one of the more essential devices of nature
with which she separates man from his
animalistic background. Animals on all
plans of development lower than that of
man, never feel the beneficent emotion of
sorrow, with the exception of the dog
whose long partnership with man has made
the dog something closely akin to, but
slightly less than, a human being.
If you have a great capacity for sorrow, you
have also a great potential capacity for
genius. Provided you relate yourself to

sorrow as a welcome source of discipline
and not as a medium for self-pity.
As we continue our trip through the Valley
of the Great Miracles, you will observe that
each of them is definitely embellished with
spiritual potentialities of great benefit to
those who correctly interpret them. And you
will observe also that peace of mind is
available only to those who properly
interpret and relate themselves to the laws
of nature. If you miss this point you will
have missed the major purpose which
prompted the writing of this book!
Sorrow is the great universal denominator
which

serves

to

compose

the

circumstances of a community, or a family,
when misfortune strikes. I have known
sorrow

to

bring

together

estranged

husbands and wives who would have
yielded to no other influence and I have
seen sorrow wipe out mountain feuds
which had existed for generations.
The emotion of sorrow, like the emotion of
love, refines the souls of those who
experience it and gives them courage and
faith to meet the trials and tribulations of
struggle in a world of confusion and chaos,
provided always that sorrow is accepted as
a benefit and not as a curse. Resentment
of sorrow develops stomach ulcers, high
blood pressure and general unfriendliness
from other people.
Every sorrow brings with it the seed of an
equivalent

joy!

Look

for

that

seed,

germinate it and reap the benefit of the joy.
When you can do this, you will no longer

permit yourself to be annoyed by so trivial
a matter as dental or surgical operations,
even if they are major operations. Instead
of coddling yourself when you meet with
sorrow, look around until you find someone
with a greater sorrow than yours and help
him or her to master it. And lo, your own
sorrow will have been transmuted into
medicine for your body and your soul – the
sort of medicine with which you may cure
many

other

experiences.

types

of

unpleasant

  Nature’s Definiteness of
Purpose
The Eighth Miracle of Life
Fixation of natural laws is a miracle which
forever safeguards all of nature’s plans and
purposes and ensures that the overall plan
of the universe will be carried out without
the possibility of interference from man.
The Law of Cosmic Habitforce is the
controller of all other natural laws and is the
power which gives fixation to al habits of
every living thing in the lower orders of life
than that of man. It also fixes the habits of
energy and matter as well as the distances
and the relationships between all the stars
and planets.
Man alone has been provided with the
privilege and the means by which he may

fix his own habits, good or bad. The habits
of all living things, on a lower plane of life,
have been fixed by what we call “instinct,”
and the instinct pattern of each living thing
on

this

lower

plane

represents

the

limitations and full extent of its activities.
Man’s privilege to make and to break his
own habits has been so definitely left in his
own hands that he is not bound by any form
of inherited limitations, such as are al lower
forms of life. That great universal truth,
“Whatever the mind of man can conceive
and believe, the mind can achieve,” is
given sound foundation because of man’s
power to break al habits which have been
fastened upon him by the Law of Cosmic
Habitforce, and supplement them with
other habits of his own choosing.

Once a man chooses a goal and creates
plans for attaining it, Cosmic Habitforce will
fix all his habits which are related to that
goal so that they automatically lead him in
the direction of the goal. However, man can
break those habits at will, change his plans
and his objectives, and set up an entirely
new set of habits for the attainment of his
objective.
This power of choice in the selection and
control of habits gives man a rating but one
step below that of Infinite Intelligence, and,
in fact, gives him the privilege of drawing
upon the forces of Infinite Intelligence at will
for the attainment of all his aims and
purposes. For evidence to support this
observation one has only to take inventory
of man’s achievements during the first half
of the twentieth century, during which man

revealed more of nature’s carefully hidden
secrets than had been uncovered during
the entire previous existence of mankind.
Step by step, by the exercise of his selfestablished habits of thought, man was
ushered in the push-button age which
permits him, figuratively speaking, to
supply his every need by calmly sitting
down and pushing buttons which set up
vibrations in whatever direction he may
desire.
Perhaps this evolutionary advancement of
man, through which he has transferred to
machines most of the labors he previously
performed by hand, is only a part of
nature’s plan of introducing man to his own
mind-power by the process of elimination.
When there is no longer any need for the

use of physical power, man will then have
time to discover and use his brain power;
and in that discovery he may learn that he
can do all the things which the Nazarene
challenged him to do – “Even greater things
than I have done.”
The stars and planets, and the nebulous
matter from which these were formed, are
related to one another by nature’s habits of
fixation, operating through the Law of
Cosmic Habitforce. Day and night, the
seasons of the year, the law of balance,
and every living thing except man, are
bound by inexorable habits which make
their movements and actions accurately
predictable over long periods of time and
far in advance of the happenings.

Man alone has been given the privilege of
fixing his own earthly destiny, with the right
to

make

it

pleasant

or

unpleasant,

successful, or unsuccessful, happy or
unhappy,

rich

or

poor,

and

his

achievements are always unpredictable
because his potential power is unlimited.
If man had but two more privileges than he
now possesses he would be on an equal
footing with the Creator; namely
() the privilege of coming into the world at
birth, of his own choice; and
() the privilege of remaining among the
living as long as he desires.
Man has potential control over almost
everything

else,

but

alas,

he

rarely

discovers the powers available to him or

makes any attempt to use these powers for
his own uplift, or to make this a better
world.
For the most part, man settles down in a
sort of tug-of-war struggle with forces which
become unfriendly toward him because he
does not understand them – forces such as
the great miracles of life – and he gladly
settles with life for a place to sleep, a little
food to fill his belly and enough clothes to
hide his nakedness.
Once in a long while an individual steps out
of the long procession of human beings,
takes

possession

of

his

own

mind,

recognizes its powers and makes use of
them.
Then the world has found an Edison, or a
Ford, or a Luther Burbank, or an Alexander

Graham Bel, or a Henry J. Kaiser – men
who

have

removed

al

self-imposed

limitations because they learned the truth
that “Whatever the mind can conceive and
believe, the mind can achieve.”
Geniuses? Yes, because genius is simply
a matter of self-discovery!
Know yourself – your “other self” which
does not recognize limitations – and you
may become “the Master of Your Fate, the
Captain of Your Soul,” and peace of mind
will come to you as naturally as the eating
of a meal when you are hungry.
Man’s major weakness consists not in
riches he does not possess, but in the
failure to make use of that which he has! In
every generation of people, less than one
percent of those who are living take over

the torchlight of civilization and carry it over
for the benefit of the next generation.
Civilization is kept on the march by those
who discover and make use of their own
minds. The same is true in the average
business enterprise, where a relatively
small

percentage

connected

with

of

the

individuals

the

business

are

responsible for its successful operation.
The others are there in body but not in mind
and spirit, and often they take out of the
business more than they contribute to it.
Nature does not vacillate; does not
procrastinate; does not change her plans
and in this respect, she sets a beautiful
example

for

people

to

follow.

The

successful ones do follow the example; the
failures do not.

One of the impressive discoveries revealed
to me during my contact with the successful
men and women who helped me organize
the Science of Success, consisted in the
fact that they moved with definiteness of
purpose and never wavered, slowed down,
or quit when the going was hard. They
succeeded because they knew what they
desired, laid plans for attaining it and
followed those plans until they were
rewarded with success.
I have often thought, when observing
successful people who stick to their
purpose through failure after failure, that
Infinite Intelligence throws itself on the side
of the person who will not quit when
obstacles have to be surmounted; for
somehow these people always triumph

eventual y, no matter how many handicaps
they have to master.
When I first heard that Thomas A. Edison
had surmounted more than ten thousand
failures before he found the secret of the
incandescent electric lamp, I wondered
how any human being could or would pay
such a high price for victory. Later, after I
became intimately acquainted with the
Edison mind, and the method with which he
applied it to the solution of his problems, I
discovered that it was the disciplinary
effects of those ten thousand failures which
made Edison the greatest inventor of all
times.
Edison must have recognized, as he met
with

one

failure

after

another,

that

persistence would eventually bring him the

secret he was seeking. I am led to this
conclusion

because

of

my

own

experiences in times of failure, when I was
searching for the causes of success and
failure, for each failure with which I met had
only the effect of making me more
determined to keep on until I met with
success. That small , still voice which
speaks to one from within kept telling me
not to quit when I was overtaken by defeat.
If we could only experience, for a single
time, the hurts of both the physical and
mental pains felt by those who go through
the period of struggle before they meet with
victory in the upper brackets of human
achievements,

we

would

be

utterly

ashamed to admit the fear of so trivial an
experience as that of dental surgery or
major operations.

  Nature’s Profound
Bookkeeping System
The Ninth Miracle of Life
Nature’s universal balance is another
device by which nature maintains a perfect
balance

of

everything

that

exists

throughout the universe, including
() Time,
() Space,
() Energy,
() Matter and
() Intelligence, through which these
known factors are shaped into every
specialized form known to man.
Through the operation of this automatic
law, nature has made it compulsory that

every individual person be forced to taste
both the bitter and the sweet experiences
of life, but she has wisely and cleverly
injected into this law a compensating
agency which aids the individual in
balancing

the

bitter

and

the

sweet

according to his own needs and desires.
This provision was necessary because the
Creator’s overall plan provides that man
shall have unquestioned control over his
own mind, with the privilege of directing it
to either bitter or sweet ends.
Through

the

operation

of

this

compensating device, which is a portion of
the great law of Universal Balance, every
adversity, every defeat, every failure, every
disappointment, every human frustration of
whatsoever nature or cause, brings with it,
in the circumstance itself, the seed of an

equivalent benefit. This fact cannot be
emphasized

too

strongly,

hence

the

repetition.
Under the provisions of this compensating
device, every person has the right and the
power to find that seed of an equivalent
benefit in every undesirable or unpleasant
experience which may overtake him,
whether the experience is of his own
making

or

beyond

his

control,

and

germinate the seed into the full-blown
flower, then the ripened fruit of some
desirable thing which will compensate him
for the adversity which yielded the seed.
Here we find evidence in abundance of the
Infinite Justice with which all individuals are
related to themselves and to one another.
Nature has so designed the overall laws of

the universe that injustice is impossible for
those who learn to interpret her laws and to
live by them. Injustice is purely a manmade institution which exists nowhere
except in man’s relationship with his
fellowmen. In man’s relationship with the
natural laws of the universe there can be
no injustice, because those laws have
cleverly provided the method by which man
automatically punishes himself for his
misdeeds,

and

himself

his

for

interpreting

he

may

virtues,

nature’s

compensate
by
laws

correctly
and

harmoniously adapting himself to them.
There are two kinds of circumstances
which affect the lives of people
() Circumstances which do not originate
as the result of something the individual

does or neglects to do, and therefore are
not subject to control by the individual.
Such circumstances, for instance, as the
death of loved ones, birth with physical
afflictions of such a nature that the affliction
cannot be corrected, or birth in underprivileged racial classes.
()

Circumstances

over

which

the

individual has the privilege of control and
the power with which to exercise that
privilege, such, for example, as fear, greed,
jealousy, vanity, egotism, lust, hatred,
envy, ill health, poverty, controversies with
relatives,

neighbors

or

business

associates, antagonism with others over
politics, religion and personal views. This
list could be extended to cover practically
every human relationship but in final
analysis it covers circumstances affecting

one’s life over which the individual has the
means of control, despite the fact that he
may seldom exercise that control.
Circumstances in group one, which are not
under the individual’s control, can be
blocked off from influencing the individual’s
peace of mind by the mere exercise of the
Great Prerogative provided by the Creator,
whereby every individual has the power to
establish and control his own mental
attitude and direct his power of thought to
any desire end , including the absolute
control of his reaction to al experiences of
his life. In other words, circumstances
which

cannot

be

controlled

can

be

eliminated from the influence of one’s
mental attitude in such a way that they do
not exist, and the individual may conduct
himself precisely the same as if they did not

exist. This is a hard task, someone may
complain. Yes, it is, but the means by which
it may be made easy will be disclosed later
on during our trip through the Val ey of
Miracles.
Circumstances in group two, those which
are under the control of the individual, can
be disposed of through the aid of the most
important and powerful of all the Great
Miracles.
This Universal Balancing Law extends not
only to human beings in all their problems
and relationships with one another, but also
to trees and all things which grow from the
soil of the earth. Observe, for example, the
perfect

engineering

and

symmetrical

balancing of a tree, with its branches
draped to keep the tree in balance on all

sides, the roots in proportion to the body
and the branches of the tree and imbedded
in the ground to the proper depth – a job of
engineering no man could duplicate.
Universal Balancing extends also to all
inanimate matter, down to the smallest
units of matter – the electrons and protons
of the atom which are held in perfect
balance by two equal units of power – one
negative unit and one positive unit – so
balanced through a sort of tug-of-war that
one pulls and the other pushes to a point of
stalemate which creates the balance.
Throughout that portion of our universe
which we have been able to explore we find
a perfect system of balancing between all
the stars and planets and the nebulous
matter which has not yet taken on the form

of planets or stars. If this Law of Balance
did not exist there would be constant chaos
through the collisions of the stars and
planets and the seasons of the year, and
day and night, would not be regulated or
their habits predictable. Most of us may not
feel a deep interest in the balancing of the
stars and planets, but all of us do have a
keen interest in the methods by which we
may take full advantage of the great Law of
Universal

Balance

in

adjusting

the

circumstances affecting our individual lives
so that they benefit us. The best way to
secure benefits from this great law is, first,
by taking possession of our power of
thought and using it to relate ourselves to
the circumstances we can control, in a
manner

favorable

to

ourselves;

and

second, to use this same power of thought

to adjust ourselves beneficially to al the
circumstances affecting our lives which we
cannot control.
From this brief analysis of the Law of
Balance we are heartened and encouraged
by the observation that this law keeps
everything throughout the universe in line
with nature’s established pattern and plan,
except man – the only living creature with
the power to deviate from the influence of
this, and all other natural laws, if and when
he chooses, and is willing to pay the price
for his deviation.
If you are searching for the supreme secret
of success in all human endeavors, here is
a very suitable point at which to stop,
ponder, meditate and think, with the hope
that the small still voice which speaks from

within may bless you with the knowledge
you seek.

  Time Nature’s Universal
Cure for All Ills
The Tenth Miracle of Life
Time is the great Universal Doctor of
human ills, who chief agent is the ether, the
energy which connects everything with
every other thing in the universe. Time is
the great healer of wounds, both physical
and mental, and it is the transformer of all
causes into their appropriate effects.
Time trades irrational youth for maturity of
age and wisdom!
Time transmutes the wounds of the heart
and the frustrations of our daily lives into
courage, endurance and understanding.
Without this kindly and beneficent service
most individuals would be lost in the early
days of their youth.

Time ripens the grain in the fields and the
fruit of the trees and makes them ready for
human enjoyment and sustenance.
Time gives hotheads a chance to cool off
and become rational.
Time helps us to discover the great laws of
nature, by the trial-and-error method and
helps us profit by our mistakes of judgment.
Time is our most precious possession,
because we can be sure of no more than a
single second of it on any given date or
place.
Time is the agent of mercy through which
we may repent of our sins and errors and
gain useful knowledge therefrom.
Time favors those who interpret nature’s
laws correctly and who adapt them as

guideposts to the correct habits of living,
but Time swings heavily with penalties for
those who ignore or neglect her laws.
Time is the master manipulator of the
universal law of Cosmic Habitforce, the
fixer of al habits, both of living creatures
and inanimate things. Time is also the
master manipulator of the lesser law of
compensation, through the operation of
which everyone reaps that which he sows.
(The positive operation of this law is called
the law of increasing returns; the negative
operation is called the law of diminishing
returns).
Time does not always operate the law of
compensation swiftly, but it does operate
definitely, according to fixed habits and
patterns

which

the

philosopher

understands and by which he can foretell
the nature of coming events by examining
the cause from which they are to spring.
Time is also the master manipulator of the
great Law of Change which keeps all things
and all people in a constant state of flux
and never allows them to remain the same
for two minutes in succession. This truth is
laden

with

benefits

of

stupendous

proportions because it provides the means
by which we may correct our mistakes,
eliminate our false fears and weak habits
and exchange ignorance for wisdom and
peace of mind as we grow older.
Go back into your past experiences and
take count of the occasions when your
troubled heart found no surcease from its

aches save only by the merciful hand of
Doctor Time.
If you have failed in business or in some
occupational undertaking which you chose
as your life work, you may have observed
that time came to your rescue with other
and perhaps greater opportunities; and you
rejoiced that you had been detoured from
your course to a smoother and broader
highway of opportunity.
On the next occasion when you find
yourself wasting a single second of this
precious agent of opportunity, time, copy
the following resolution, commit it to
memory and start immediately to carry it
out.
My Commitment to Doctor Time

. Time is my greatest asset and I shall
relate myself to it on a budget system which
provides that every second not devoted to
sleep shall be used for self-improvement.
. In the future I shall regard the loss,
through neglect, of any portion of my time
as a sin, for which I must atone by the
better use in the future of an equivalent
amount of it.
. Recognizing that I shall reap that which I
sow, I shall sow only the seeds of service
which may benefit others as well as myself
and thereby throw myself in the way of the
great Law of Compensation.
. I shall so use my time in the future that
each day will bring me some measure of
peace of mind, in the absence of which I

shall recognize that the seed I have been
sowing needs re-examination.
. Knowing that my habits of thought
become the patters which attract all the
circumstances affecting my life through the
lapse of time, I shall keep my mind so busy
in connection with the circumstances I
desire that no time will be left to devote to
fears and frustrations and the things I do
not desire.
. Recognizing that, at best, my allotted
time on the earth plane is indefinite and
limited, I shall endeavor in all ways possible
to use my portion of it so that those nearest
me will benefit by my influence and be
inspired by my example to make the best
possible use of their own time.

. Finally, when my allotment of time shall
have expired, I hope I may leave behind me
a monument to my name – not a monument
in stone, but in the hearts of my fellowmen
– a monument whose marking will testify
that the world was made a little better
because of my having passed this way.
. I shall repeat this commitment daily
during the remainder of my allotment of
time and back it with BELIEF that it will
improve my character and inspire those
whom I may influence, to likewise improve
their lives.
The hands of the Clock of Time are moving
swiftly onward! We cry out, “Backward, turn
backward O Time in your flight,” but time
does not heed your cries.
It is later than you think!

Arouse yourself, fellow wayfarer; awake
and take possession of your own mind
while you still have enough time to become,
during the yet unexpired future, that which
you would have liked to have been in the
past.
Make the most of your present allotment of
time, with the hope that you will not have to
reincarnate in order to do the job all over
again because of neglect.
You have been warned!
Now the responsibility is YOURS. There is
a simple test by which you may judge
whether or not you have been using your
time to best advantage. If you have
attained peace of mind and material
opulence sufficient for your needs, your
time has been properly used. If you have

not attained these blessings, your time has
not been properly used and you should
begin now to search for the circumstances
in connection with which you have fallen
short.
The truly great people have no such reality
as “idle time,” because they keep their
minds geared eternally to patterns of
constructive thought. By this profound use
of the time, they develop an alert sixth
sense through which they look, listen and
see from within.
If negative thoughts stray into the minds of
the

truly

great,

immediately
thoughts

these

transmuted

and

exercised

thoughts

are

into

positive

by

positive

physical action appropriate to their nature.

Tick, tick, tick – the pendulum of the Clock
of Time is swinging rapidly!
The entire face of civilization is undergoing
an uplifting operation.
Mr. Right and Mr. Wrong are engaged in
mortal combat for supremacy. The time has
come for everyone to stand up and be
counted. The use each of us makes of his
individual allotment of time will tell whose
side each of us in on Mr. Right or Mr.
Wrong’s.
Something has speeded up the Clock of
Time so rapidly that the last half of the
twentieth century will reveal to mankind
more individual opportunities for selfimprovement than have been revealed
during the entire past of man’s existence.

Your share of these vast opportunities may
be embraced and used only by the way you
relate yourself to time!

  The American Way of Life
Makes Men Free
The Eleventh Miracle of Life
Freedom of the American way of life is one
of the Great Miracles of all times. Here in
the United States of America the state has
been set and the way has been prepared,
as nowhere else on this earth at any period
of time, for man to take full and complete
possession of his own mind and direct it to
whatever ends he may desire.
Our American Way of Life was born by the
shedding of tears and blood and matured
through hardship and struggle which
touched the lives of every living citizen of
the nation; all of which indicates that our
way of life harmonizes in every particular
with the Creator’s plan to al ow al men to

become free by the exercise of their own
minds.
Evidence that ours is a land of opportunity,
where every person may choose his own
objective in life and achieve it, through the
operation of his own mind, is available in
overwhelming abundance. Where else on
earth,

except

in

America,

could

an

uneducated Italian immigrant, such as A. B.
Giannina, start his career by pushing a
banana cart and pyramid his efforts into the
ownership of the world’s largest banking
system – the Bank of America?
Where else but in America could a young,
uneducated mechanic give birth to an
industry like that of the automobile industry,
and without capital to begin with, pyramid
his humble beginning into a world-wide

empire with a fabulous fortune, and provide
employment for hundreds of thousands of
people, as did Henry Ford?
And where, except in the United States,
does the humblest laborer enjoy more of
the modern conveniences of living than did
kings and potentates a few generations
ago?
Where else on earth, except in the United
Sates, is every citizen provided with
adequate motives of self-aggrandizement
sufficient to inspire him to act on his own
personal initiative, choose his own career,
think his own thoughts, and express them
in any manner he may choose?
Where else is every male child born as a
potential holder of the highest office the
people have to offer, and where else has

such a high office been successfully
administered by a humble rail-splitter?
Where, except in the United States of
America, can any individual of any race or
creed walk with dignity upon the earth and
say truly, “I am free?”
Where, except in America, could an
uneducated lad choose as his career the
business of inventing, surround himself
with a Master Mind of scientifically skilled
men, and make himself one of the greatest
inventors of all times, as di Thomas A.
Edison?
I have posed these questions for you, who
enjoy the largess of the great American
Way of Life, with the hope that you who
read this volume will answer them each in
his own way, according to the benefits this

country may have provided him; and in
searching your hearts and minds for the
answers, learn to better evaluate the vast
opportunities open to you in any calling you
may choose.
Before we leave this analysis of the Great
American Way of Life let us be reminded
that this heritage will remain ours only so
long as we recognize it, use it properly and
protect it. Like all other blessings conferred
upon man by Mother Nature, our rights to
the privileges we enjoy in America will
remain only as long as we earn the right to
them. Nature looks with great disfavor on
the idea of something for nothing.

  Wisdom Robs Death of Its
Sting
The Twelfth Miracle of Life
The mystery of death It may be difficult for
most people to interpret death as being
anything but an unavoidable tragedy, but
this limited view of the subject can be
broadened by taking account of the overall
plan of the universe, which is in a constant
state of flux, constantly undergoing eternal
change.
Man comes to the earth plane without his
knowledge or consent, remains in the
Great School of Life a little while, then
passes into another plane of intelligence
without his consent. It is not a part of the
Creator’s plan for man to live on the earth

plane forever, and it would be a tragedy if it
were a part of the overall plan.
Could anyone think of anything more
frightful than to be compelled to remain
forever on this earth plane of struggle,
where life itself depends upon eternal
vigilance on the part of the individual?
The life span is something like the modern
school system. We enter the kindergarten
period, graduate from there into the grades,
then into high school, and from there we
enter the last stage by entering college.
The major purpose behind man’s brief
interlude on earth seems to be that of
education.
If there had been no device of death, think
of the evil men the world has known –

men who would still be living and making
life miserable for everyone – the would-be
conquerors and self- appointed dictators
who have sought, from the dawn of
civilization, to enslave all mankind.
Death is but an extended form of sleep,
during which the individual sheds his tired,
worn out physical body for one that is
inexhaustible and eternal. Therefore, it is a
circumstance over which the individual has
no final control, and it should be accepted
as such and dismissed from the mind.
Understand the Law of Change, which is a
part of the universal system, and death
becomes understandable, and may readily
be accepted as a necessity. There could
not coexist in the universe an eternal Law

of Change and eternal life on the earth
plane.
The individual may fear death, dread to
meet with it, and look upon it as a tragedy,
but fortunately the individual is only a pawn
in relation to the overall plan of the
universe, and as such his desires and the
means of their fulfillment are confined
entirely to that brief interlude known as life,
over which the individual has been given a
free hand, to spend his brief visit in
whatever manner he pleases.
The attitude of the philosopher toward
death seems to be the sensible one. He
accepts it as a circumstance over which he
has but a slight, limited control; therefore,
he adjusts himself to it in a neutral spirit of
belief that when it comes he will be ready

for it, and he then dismisses the subject
and devotes his energies to making his life
yield all the benefits he can in connection
with those circumstances over which he
has control.
The philosopher looks upon those who fear
death as offering insult to their Creator. And
the

philosopher

accepts

every

circumstance which touches his life as grist
for the Mill of Life, and promptly adjusts
himself to al such circumstances in a
manner best suited to enable him to benefit
from them.
Some of the Great Miracles constitute the
major impedimenta standing in the way of
peace of mind of the majority of people.
The purpose of this analysis of the Miracles
of Life is to help the individual relate himself

to them in a mental attitude which will
change them from things to be dreaded, to
circumstances

which

can

be

made

beneficial to his interests.
Through this analysis of the Great Miracles,
the “Worry Bird” (which most people feed
unnecessarily) has been robbed of the food
necessary to keep it alive, and the way has
been cleared for peace of mind, based on
the acceptance of al the circumstances of
life, just as they are.
It is my hope that each of you who read this
volume will be conditioned, upon finishing
this chapter, to properly interpret and apply
the principles set forth in subsequent
chapters, which have been designed to
help you relate yourself to the Miracles in a

manner that will give you the greatest
benefits.
When this hope shall have been realized,
then you will have found peace of mind
which will endure throughout the remainder
of your life.
The statements I have made in this
analysis are not important . But the thinking
on your part, which the statements may
have inspired, is important! For it may well
be that the thinking thus inspired may give
you a change of attitude toward life which
will make life sweeter as the years grow
fewer.

  The Limitless Power of the
Mind
The Thirteenth Miracle of Life
The mind of man would lead all the other
Miracles of Life if they had been described
in the order of their importance, because
the mind is the instrument through which
man relates himself to all things and
circumstances that affect or influence his
life.
Without doubt the human mind is the most
mysterious, the most awe-inspiring product
which nature has produced and at the
same time it is the least understood and the
most often abused, of man’s profound gifts
from the Creator.
The mind is the citadel of the soul, wherein
is housed the connecting link between the

conscious thinking process of man and
Infinite Intelligence. It is the switchboard, so
to speak, through which man may tune in
and communicate directly with the great
universal reservoir of Infinite Intelligence,
and draw therefrom the answers to all his
problems, the way of fulfillment of all his
hopes, dreams and aspirations.
And most profound of all , the mind is the
one and only thing over which the Creator
has given man the complete right of
control; a prerogative which not even the
Creator has set aside, reversed, or in any
manner usurped, which strongly suggests
that the mind was intended for man’s
exclusive use; that it is the most important
of all the gifts of the Creator; and the means
by which man may control the major portion
of his earthly destiny.

All of man’s successes and al of his failures
and frustrations are the direct result of the
manner in which he uses his mind or
neglects to use it.
The functional operations of the mind are
divided into nine departments, something
on the order of a well-organized business.
Some of these departments function
automatically, without direction by the
individual, while other departments are
under the control of the individual at all
times.
Here is a breakdown of all the departments
of the mind
(a) The Faculty of Will The Will is the “big
boss” of all the other departments of the
mind. Here is the starting point where the
individual begins to exercise his Great

Prerogative privilege of exclusive control
over his thoughts. The faculty of the Will is
the “yes” and the “no” man of the entire
mind. It carries out orders of the individual,
regardless of their nature or the effect they
may have upon the individual. The power
of the Will remains strong in exact
proportion to its use. An idle Will , like an
idle arm, will become soft and weak.
(b) The Faculty of Reason The faculty of
Reason is the “presiding judge” of the mind.
When directed, or permitted, to do so, it will
pass judgment on all ideas, aims, desires,
purposes and circumstances which the
individual brings to its attention; but its
decisions can be set aside by the “big
boss,” the Will , or offset by the influence of
the emotions if the Will does not assert
itself. One of the major weaknesses of all

so-called thinking is the tendency of
individuals to al ow their Wills to be set
aside by their emotions. This error can be,
and it often is, tragic, because the emotions
have no relation to logic or reason;
therefore, all action growing out of the
emotions should have careful attention of
the Wil .
(c) The Faculty of Emotions Here is the
starting place of a major portion of all
actions of the mind. People make decisions
which harmonize with their “feelings,” and
engage in activities which have not been
previewed by the faculties of Reason and
Will. Such decisions are more often
unsound than sound.
The most common reckless use of the
emotions, without due attention from the

faculties of Reason and Wil , originates
through the emotion of Love. The emotion
of Love partakes of a spiritual quality of the
highest order, but it may be, and it often is,
the most dangerous of all the emotions
because people generally do not submit it
to the modifying influence of the Reason
and the Will.
Accurate thinkers – people who use all the
departments of their minds in the process
of thinking – never al ow the emotion of
Love to express itself until its actions have
been carefully looked over by the Reason
and the Will. Moreover, the accurate
thinker submits all of his deepest desires,
plans and purposes to his departments of
Reason and Wil to make sure that his
eagerness

and

enthusiasm

do

not

overthrow his Wisdom; and his emotion of

Love is always under constant suspicion
lest it get from under his control.
(d) The Faculty of Imagination This faculty
is the architect of man’s soul through which
he may pattern his own earthly destiny to
suit himself and change or modify that
pattern as often as he pleases. With the aid
of his Imagination, many may penetrate the
Interstellar spaces of Infinitude with the
speed of lightning, conquer the air above
him and the seas below him and create a
million ideas and concepts of benefit to
himself by merely combining in new ways
old ideas and concepts.
Thought his Imagination man may combine
fantasy with realism and shape these into
living empires of industry which change the
entire trend of civilization. Nothing is

impossible of accomplishment by the
Imagination which is guided by the faculties
of

Will

and

Reason,

but

unbridled

Imagination can play havoc with an
Individual’s life; and it has been said that
when the emotion of Love and the
Imagination get together and go on an
unchaperoned spree, the individual may
never recover from the damage they do.
The Imagination is the place or origin of the
sixty-four-dollar physical ailment known as
hypochondria, which has proved to be a
major problem with doctors. It may also be
the place of origin of the cure for
hypochondria and there are many reliable
authorities who claim that the Imagination
exercises such powerful influence over the
physical body that it can activate the body
resistance mechanism and cause it to

eliminate many types of real physical
ailments.
The Imagination is a great institution whose
potentialities are practical y unlimited, but it
is a very tricky institution which requires
constant supervision by the faculties of the
Reason and the Will. It may be helpful if
you will read the preceding sentence many
times, until you become impressed by the
potency of the suggestion it carries.
(e) The Faculty of Conscience Here we
have the department of the mind which
gives moral guidance to the individual. If
allowed to function without interference,
the Conscience carefully processes al of
the individual’s aims and purposes and
warns him when they do not harmonize
with the moral laws of nature. This warning

ceases and the Conscience eventually
goes out of business altogether if the
individual fails or neglects to heed its
warnings.
The individual who has the fully support of
his Conscience in connection with all his
desires, aims and purposes, has direct
access to the necessary Faith to enable
him to accomplish whatever he may set his
heart and mind upon.
(f) The Five Physical Senses The five
senses – sight, sound, taste, smell and
touch – are the physical “arms” of the brain,
through which it contacts the external world
and acquires information. The senses are
not always reliable; therefore, they require
constant supervision by the faculty of
Reason and the Will.

Under any sort of highly emotion activity,
the senses often become confused and
highly undependable, as in the case of
sudden fright, or intense anger. No
decision which is reached under the
influence of fear or anger should be
allowed to stand, until it has been
thoroughly reviewed by Wil and Reason.
(g) The Faculty of Memory Here is the
“filing cabinet” of the brain wherein is stored
al

thought

impulses,

all

conscious

experiences and al sensations which reach
the brain through the five physical senses.
The Memory is also very undependable, as
most individuals can testify. Therefore, it
needs supervision and discipline by the Will
and the Reason. The main cause for the
unreliability of the Memory is due to the fact
that the “filing clerk” – the individual who

supervises the action of the Memory – is
careless in not having a definite system by
which to work.
The Memory can be made reasonably
reliable with the aid of a practical Memory
training course, ,such as the Roth system.
Reliability of the Memory is entirely a
matter

of

discipline,

supervision

and

education of the “filing clerk” who is
responsible

for

the

function

of

this

important faculty of mind.
(h) The “Sixth Sense” This is the
broadcasting and the receiving station of
the mind through which one automatically
sends and receives vibrations of thought
and perhaps other still higher vibrations
which emanate on planes of intelligence
outside that of our own earth. This is the

medium of communication between the
individual and the Unseen Guides which
are believed to be available for his service.
The “Sixth Sense” is the medium through
which a properly qualified mind may
communicate with other minds, at any
distance, through the principle of telepathy.
The principle of telepathy has been
recognized, by reliable authorities, as a
workable reality and the means by which it
may be put into service has been described
in detail in many books, including some
which I have written.
(i) The Subconscious Section of the Mind
This is the “switchboard” through which the
conscious section of the mind may
communicate
Intelligence.

directly

with

Infinite

The Subconscious acts upon any idea,
plan, or purpose which reaches it and
makes no attempt to distinguish the
difference between positive and negative
or right and wrong influences. But it does
respond more quickly and effectively to
influences

which

have

been

highly

emotionalized with such emotions as fear,
anger, belief and faith.
The Subconscious section of the mind is
amenable

to

the

influences

of

the

conscious section of the mind, which often
stubbornly

closes

the

door

to

the

Subconscious through fears and limitations
and false beliefs. In order to get around
these negative barricades set up by the
conscious section of the mind and in order
to give directions to the Subconscious for
the cure of physical ailments, doctors of

Suggestive Therapeutics often wait until
the individual is asleep (sometimes through
hypnotism) and then communicate directly
with the Subconscious.
As stated earlier, there is a machine in
successful

operation

with

which

any

desired order can be given to the
Subconscious

while

the

individual

is

asleep. The orders or instructions are
recorded on a phonograph record and
placed on the machine which plays them
every fifteen minutes (until the individual
awakes and turns off the machine). The
machine is operated by a clock which can
be set to start the playing of the record after
the individual is asleep.
The references in this volume to the
departments of the mind are, of necessity,

brief and not intended as exhaustive
analyses of these subjects, but merely a
bird’s-eye picture of the “mechanism”
through which the human mind operates,
together with a brief description of the
extent to which the departments of the
mind are under the control of the individual.
We would emphasize that all thought,
whether it is negative or positive, sound or
unsound, tends to clothe itself in its
physical equivalent and it proceeds to do
so by inspiring the individual with ideas,
plans and purposes for the attainment of
desired ends, through natural and logical
means. After thought on any subject
becomes, through repetition, a habit, it is
taken over and automatically acted upon by
the Subconscious.

It may not be true that “thoughts are
things,” but it is true that thoughts create
things and the things thus created are
strikingly similar to the nature of the
thoughts from which they are fashioned.
It is believed by many people, who are
competent to judge accurately, that every
thought which one releases starts an
unending vibration with which the one who
releases it will have to contend later; that
man himself is but the physical reflection of
thought

put

into

motion

by

Infinite

Intelligence. It is also the belief of many that
the energy with which people think is but a
projected portion of Infinite Intelligence
which the individual appropriates from the
universal source, through the equipment of
the brain.

We have now reached the point at which
we shall begin the explanation of the
means by which one’s mind may be
conditioned for dentistry, major surgical
operations,

or

any

other

unpleasant

experience which one may have to face.
The conditioning of the mind must be done
entirely through the subconscious section
of the mind. Therefore, let us have a further
look

at

the

subconscious

means
may

be

by

which

the

reached

and

directed to any desired end at will.
You

cannot

entirely

control

your

subconscious mind, but you can voluntarily
influence it to act upon any desire, plan, or
purpose which you may wish translated
into concrete form.

The subconscious never remains idle. If
you neglect to keep it busy with desires of
your own choice it will feed upon the
thoughts inspired by your environment,
especially those associated with the things
you do not want, the things you fear or
dislike.
Whether you recognize it or not, you are
living daily in the midst of all sorts of
thought impulses which are reaching your
subconscious

mind

without

your

knowledge. Some of these impulses are
negative; some are positive. You are now
about to be informed how to shut off the
flow of negative influences which reach and
influence you and the means by which
these negative influences, including all
fears, may be supplanted by desires, plans
and purposes of your own choosing,

including, in particular, the means of
mastering physical pain.
When you master the technique you are
about to receive and learn to apply it, you
will possess the key which unlocks the door
to your subconscious mind and you will
control that door so completely that no
undesirable thoughts or influences can
pass through it.
Before

we

describe

the

method

of

approach to the subconscious mind you
should recognize that there are two doors
to your subconscious. One door opens
outward toward the physical world in which
you live and that world can be entered only
through that door. The other door opens
inwardly and connects directly with the

great

universal

reservoir

of

Infinite

Intelligence.
It is through these two doors that prayer
operates.
It is through these two doors that one’s
hopes, desires and plans may be fulfilled
through definiteness of purpose and a
burning desire for its realization.
It is through these two doors that all of
one’s fears, doubts and discouragements
are translated into the miseries of life if the
conscious mind is al owed to dwell upon
these undesirable conditions.

Every

thought one sends to the subconscious
mind because of one’s neglect to process
and reject negative thoughts inspired by
one’s

environment,

is

automatically

accepted by the subconscious and acted
upon.
One of the greatest of the inconsistencies
of mankind is the fact that the majority of
people go through life with their minds
devoted largely to thinking of all the things
and circumstances they do not wish –
poverty, failures, ill health, unhappiness
and physical pain – and they then wonder
why they are cursed with all of these
undesirable conditions.
The mind attracts to one the exact material
equivalent of that which one thinks about
most often. Along with this statement of
fact, remember that the Creator provided
every

normal

person

with

complete,

unchallengeable right and power to control
and direct his mind power to whatever ends

he may choose and you will have no
difficulty in recognizing that all undesirable
circumstances one meets with are the
results of neglect to take possession of the
mind and to guide it to the ends one
desires.
Hypochondria, The Doctor’s $.
Word
Hypochondria means imaginary physical
ailment! It is a conservative statement to
say that this ailment gives doctors and
dentists more trouble than all the real
ailments known to mankind. The fear of il
health and its first cousin, the fear of
physical pain, are inherited states of mind
and they constitute one of the Seven Basic
Fears with which all people suffer at one
time or another.

In my public lectures some years ago, I
gave dramatic demonstrations of the
nature of this inborn fear of il health and of
physical pain – demonstrations which
proved that persons with not a single trace
of physical ailments could be made
violently il by mere suggestion.
The

technique

by

which

this

was

demonstrated was very simple. With the
aid of four assistants, who were stationed
secretly at various places in and out of the
auditorium where I was lecturing, the
demonstration was carried out. A “victim”
was secretly chosen from the audience by
a committee of my students. At recess, by
prearrangement with my “stooges,” each of
them approached the “victim” and asked
him or her questions.

Stooge number one would ask, “Are you
not feeling well? You look as if you are ill.”
Stooge number two would rush up to the
“victim” and in an excited voice exclaim, “I
say my friend, you look as if you are about
to faint! Can I get you a drink of water?”
Stooge number three would soon appear
and say to the victim. “Let me give you a
hand. You look as if you are about to pass
out.” Then turning to those who were
looking one, he would add “Here folks,
help me find a place for this person to lie
down. He is ill.”
If the “victim” had not actually passed out
by this time, he generally did so when the
fourth stooge approached him, grabbed
him by the arm, and called, “Someone call
a doctor quickly. This person needs
attention.”

I performed this experiment many times
and never failed to make the “victim”
temporarily il . Finally, the person chosen
for the experiment, a man about thirty years
of age, so completely passed out that he
had to be hospitalized for a short time. The
doctors finally convinced him that he had
been the victim of an experimental hoax.
After that experience I tried no more
experiments of this nature.
Convince the subconscious mind that you
are il and it will go to work immediately to
carry

that

conviction

to

its

logical

conclusion by actually making you il .
Hypochondria often produces the actual
physical symptoms of illness, such as the
breaking out of a rash, an upset stomach or

a headache when the actual cause is
nothing more than fear.
Inmates of the Ohio State Penitentiary
formerly played a cruel joke on many of the
newcomers to prison. The joke consisted of
a committee of prisoners charging the
newcomer with some imaginary infraction
of the prison rules and then condemning
him to death. The victim was then
blindfolded; his hands were tied behind him
and his head was placed over a barrel, with
several men holding him down tightly. Then
one of the gang would ask if the knife had
been properly sharpened. Someone would
say, “Yes, I sharpened it myself right after
we killed that last man. Here it is – now let
him have it good and hard so he can’t
scream.”

With that part of the ceremony finished, a
comb would be roughly drawn across the
victim’s neck, quickly followed by spilling
red ink over the neck. Then the victim
would be turned loose and everyone would
run for cover. Generally, the first thing the
victim did was to pull the blindfold from his
eyes and rub his neck with his hands,
which of course led him to believe his throat
had been cut, because there was the
“blood” on his hands.
On one occasion a mand thus victimized
was so badly scared that he started running
and screaming that he had been murdered.
He had to be caught and subdued by prison
guards, after which he was hospitalized for
several days before he recovered from the
shock, despite the fact he could plainly see
his throat had not been cut.

The fear of sickness and the fear of
physical pain are inborn fears, which come
to the surface and take over at the slightest
provocation. The fear itself, however, is
always much worse than the thing which is
feared. As Franklin D. Roosevelt said,
during his first term in office, when the
country was cursed by a stampede of fear,
“The only thing we have to fear is FEAR
itself.” The truth might well be paraphrased
in connection with the fear of dentistry,
because modern dental techniques have
practically removed all physical pain from
every portion of the patient’s body except
one, and that is the brain where his fear of
pain exists, as a condition of mind he has
created long before he sits in the dentist’s
chair.

How

to

Reach

and

Influence

the

Subconscious Mind
The subconscious section of the mind
receives activating influences from three
sources First, from all outside sources
which convey influences to the individual
through the five senses, including of course
the words and deeds of others which come
to one’s attention. Second, through the
sixth sense, which picks up thoughts
released by others and passes them on to
the individual by telepathy. Third, from the
thoughts of the individual, including both
the thoughts which are deliberately sent to
the subconscious in the form of aims, plans
or desires and random thoughts which the
individual indulges in without a particular
plan or purpose.

Random,

careless,

negative

thoughts

occupy the minds of most people and such
thoughts

produce

undesirable

circumstances, because they are picked up
by the subconscious and acted upon. The
subconscious

does

not

differentiate

between negative and positive thoughts
but accepts and acts upon one type as
quickly as upon the other.
Here then is the reason why most people
are in the classification of “failures.” Most of
their thoughts are of failure and the
subconscious mind carries them out to their
logical conclusion.
Since the subconscious translates into
their logical conclusion all thoughts which
reach it – whether they are good or bad for
the individual – it is clearly suggested that

the way to put the subconscious mind to
work for one in a helpful way is by giving it
definite orders as to what is desired.
When it comes to giving orders to the
subconscious

mind,

there

are

some

instructions which must be carried out to
the letter
(a) Write out a clear statement of that which
you wish your subconscious mind to act
upon and set a definite time within which
you wish action. Memorize this statement
and repeat it to yourself, orally, hundreds of
times daily, especially just before going to
sleep.
(b) When you repeat your statement
BELIEVE that it will be acted upon by your
subconscious mind and see yourself
already in possession of that which your

statement calls for. Close your statement
by expressing gratitude for having received
what you asked for.
(c) Before repeating your statement to your
subconscious, work yourself into a high,
intense state of emotional enthusiasm and
joy because of your inner feeling that your
request will be fulfilled. The subconscious
acts almost instantaneously on thoughts
which are expressed in any state of high
emotion, either negative or positive. This
last statement is highly significant. Please
read it again and think about it.
How to Condition the Mind for Dentistry
We come now to the detailed instructions
through which one may condition his mind
for dentistry, and, by slight changes in the
formula, the mind may be conditioned to

meet any unpleasant circumstance which
one contemplates, such as a major surgical
operation, the loss of loved ones in death,
etc. The instructions are as follows
(a) Prepare the entire physical body for the
contemplated operation by a three to seven
days total fast, which must be conducted
under the supervision of your physician.
Two days prior to the beginning of the fast
eat nothing but fresh fruits and drink only
fruit juices, also omit smoking and coffee.
You will be somewhat nervous during these
two days but do not let that discourage you.
At the end of the two days begin your fast
and take nothing into your system except
water with two or three drops of lemon juice
added to each glass. Drink al the water you
can – as many as a dozen or more glasses
each day.

When the fast ends eat nothing the first day
but one bowl of vegetable soup with no fat
in it and one slice of whole wheat bread, or
toast. On the second day eat two bowls of
vegetable soup and two slices of bread –
one bowl in the forenoon and one in the
afternoon. Starting the third day you may
eat whatever you please as long as you eat
sparingly. It is highly important that you
come back to your normal eating habits
gradually. In general, this is the procedure
which should be followed, but every detail
of it, including the number of days you
should fast, must be carefully checked by
your physician before you begin your fast.
The

purpose

of

the

fast,

physically

speaking, is to give your entire physical
system, your stomach, your digestive
organs, your eliminative system, your

blood stream, an opportunity to take a
vacation. The purpose of the fast, mentally
speaking, is to let you prove to yourself that
you are the master of your stomach. Once
you have mastered your desire for food you
will have little or no difficulty in mastering
your fear of physical pain.
Still another purpose of the fast is that it
conditions

your

mind

for

easy

communication with your subconscious
mind. During your fast your subconscious
mind will be very sensitive to al influences
around you, so beware of negative people
and the discussion of negative subjects.
(b) Beginning on the first day of your fast,
give

yourself

a

treatment,

through

autosuggestion, by repeating the following
instruction to your subconscious mind at

least once every hour, except when you are
asleep, during your entire fast
() I have complete confidence in my
dentist, in his skill, his character and his
experience in dentistry.
() While my dental work is being
performed by my dentist, I shall completely
disassociate my mind from it by keeping my
mind on the thing I desire most in life, which
is________.
() I desire my dental work to be done
because it will add to my personal
appearance and improve my physical
health; and because I so desire it, I shall go
through the operation as a welcome
opportunity to prove to myself that my mind
is stronger than the emotion of fear.

() I hereby direct my subconscious mind
to take over my desire, as I have expressed
it and carry it out in every detail and thus
make my dental experience a magnificent
interlude. Through this experience I shall
make discoveries concerning the powers of
my mind with which I shall guide my entire
future so as to get more joy out of life.
These

instructions

are

simple

and

understandable, but they will introduce you
to a new way of life which may smooth your
path in all your future experiences and
human relations, as well as carry you
through your dental operation without the
slightest annoyance.
In these instructions I have introduced you
to the most favorable condition under which
you

may

give

directives

to

your

subconscious mind – during a fast. Under
this condition your subconscious mind will
be very alert and amenable to any
influence which you may direct to it, or any
influence which may get to it by your
neglect to keep away from negative
influences.
Now let us have a few words concerning
the subject of fasting. Here are some of the
benefits available through the habit of
fasting, quite aside from the fact that fasting
is an excellent method of preparing your
subconscious mind to receive and carry out
your directives
(a) The habit of fasting, which should be
carried out at least once or twice every
year, tones up the entire physical body and

aids it in building up bodily resistance to
disease.
(b)

Fasting

provides

an

opportunity

whereby one may easily break the habits of
smoking and the drinking of coffee and
alcoholic beverages. If you smoke or drink
alcoholic beverages, as a habit, you will
have to learn the habit all over again after
you go through your fast, if you wish to
smoke or drink again.
(c) Fasting brings one into very close
relationship with one’s spiritual powers,
which is the major reason why directives
given to the subconscious mind during a
fast are so effective and operate so quickly.
(d) Fasting is an excellent habit for most
neurotic and melancholic people who
suffer with imaginary ailments, provided

always that it is carried out under the
supervision of a reputable doctor. Fasting
is not child’s play and it never should be
undertaken by anyone except by order of a
doctor. Doctors in some schools of
therapeutics successful y use fasting as a
cure for many physical ailments.
(e) Fasting will not be difficult for those who
follow the instructions I have here given
and keep their minds busily occupied
during the fast, by giving directives to their
subconscious minds. This is one of the
major reasons for the habit of fasting
because it opens wide the gate leading to
the subconscious mind, during which any
desired instructions may be given to the
subconscious.

If you have never gone through a voluntary
fast, you have a great treat coming to you
when you first experience this practice. You
may be slightly nervous the first two days,
especially if you drink alcoholic beverages
or coffee; but you will have an experience
from there on such as you never had
before.

Recognition

that

you

have

mastered your appetite for food will give
you a solid foundation on which you can,
and perhaps will, develop mastery over
many other things, such as poverty, failure,
defeat and fear of every type. Is not this
promise worthy of an effort at fasting?
(f) While you are on your fast you will
experience the return in memory of thigs
which happened when you were a small
child and you will experience a feeling of

self-confidence such as you perhaps never
felt previously.
Some years ago, while I was associated
with Bernard Macfadden, I had an attack of
influenza. After the attack seemed to have
passed, I had a recurrent spell of it, in a
light form, about every two weeks. In
speaking of this to Mr. Macfadden he said,
“Why don’t you go on a fast and starve that
flu bug to death? Why keep on feeding it?”
Then he gave me instructions for fasting. I
fasted for seven days, under the same
instructions I have given here, with the
result

that

the

flu

was

completely

eliminated and more important still, I
learned from that experience a system of
body-conditioning which I have followed
ever since – a system which has given me

immunity from common colds as well as
influenza.
My wife and I go on a fast together, at least
annually. We make a sort of pleasant game
out of the habit and get through it without
inconvenience or discomfort. Two or more
people fasting together, in a pleasant
mental attitude, experience even greater
benefits than if one were going through the
experience alone.
When fasting in preparation for dental or
surgical operations, the fasting should be
ended at least two weeks before the
operations begin. Meanwhile, after the fast
is over your doctor should check your
system thoroughly and make sure that your
blood count, urinal and heart tests are
satisfactory. In some instances, one’s diet,

after a fasting experience, may need food
supplements in the form of vitamins, but
these should be prescribed by your doctor,
not merely purchased on your own
judgment. Quite often it happens that
following the extraction of teeth, especially
where full dentures are indicated, the gums
do not heal satisfactorily and the dentist
finds it necessary to prescribe food
supplements in the form of vitamins.
One other suggestion concerning fasting
Do not engage in any heavy physical
activities during the fast. Light housework
or office work may be carried on during the
fast without interruption, but over-exertions
of every nature must be avoided.
There are many good books on the subject
of fasting – a list of which is available at all

public libraries. One of the best books on
this subject I can recommend is How to
Fast, by Bernard Macfadden.
Mr. Mcfadden so thoroughly conditioned
his mind for the mastery of physical pain,
through fasting some years ago, that he sat
in a dentist’s chair and had his teeth
removed without the aid of any form of
anesthetic. While this shows that pain can
be mastered by mind control, I personal y
believe in anesthetics when it comes to a
major surgical operation or the extraction of
teeth.
The procedure I have here described could
be applied as well to the mastery of poverty
and the attainment of opulence, or financial
prosperity, as to the conditioning of the
mind for dental surgery. One would need

only to change the statement of purpose to
fit whatever objective was desired.
There are no limitations to the power of the
mind save only those which the individual
establishes for himself or permits to be
established by the influences outside of
himself.
Truly, whatever the mind can conceive and
believe, the mind can achieve!
Study well the three key words in the
foregoing

sentence

because

they

epitomize the sum and the substance of
this entire chapter.
Your success in the application of the mindconditioning formula presented in this
chapter will depend very largely upon the
mental attitude in which you apply it. If you

BELIEVE you will get satisfactory results,
you will get them.
When

you

give

directions

to

your

subconscious mind, through the statement
herein which was prepared for that
purpose, you may hasten success by
repeating the statement in the form of a
prayer, and thereby place the entire power
of your religious BELIEF back of your
statement.
The word BELIEF is symbolic of a power
that has no limitations within reason and we
find evidence of its influence wherever we
find people who have achieved noteworthy
success in any calling.
Thomas A. Edison BELIEVED he could
perfect an incandescent electric lamp and
that belief carried him successfully through

the ten thousand failures before he got the
answer for which he had been searching.
Marconi BELIEVED the ether could be
made to carry the vibrations of sound
without the use of wires and that belief
carried him through many failures until he
was finally rewarded by triumph and gave
the world its first wireless means of
communication.
Columbus BELIEVED he would find land in
an unchartered portion of the Atlantic
Ocean and he sailed on until he found it,
despite the threatened mutiny of his sailors
who were not so blessed as he with the
capacity for BELIEF.
Madame Schumann-Heink BELIEVED she
could become a great opera singer,
although her singing teacher had advised

her to go back to her sewing machine and
be content as a seamstress. Her BELIEF
rewarded her with success.
Helen Keller BELIEVED she could learn to
talk despite the fact that she lost her use of
speech, sight and hearing and her BELIEF
restored her speech and helped her to
become

a

shining

example

of

encouragement to all people who are
tempted to give up in despair because of
some physical affliction.
Henry Ford BELIEVED he could build a
horseless buggy that would provide rapid
transportation at a small cost and despite
the far-flung cry of “crack-pot” and the
skepticism of the world, he belted the earth
with the product of his BELIEF and made
himself immensely wealthy.

Madame Marie Curie BELIEVED that
radium metal existed and gave herself the
task of finding its source, despite the fact
that no one had ever seen radium and no
one knew where to start looking for it. Her
BELIEF final y revealed the source of that
precious metal.
When my son was born without ears and I
was told by the doctor who brought him into
the world that he would be deaf all his life,
I BELIEVED I had the power to influence
nature to improvise a system of hearing for
him. So, I went to work through his
subconscious mind and was rewarded
when sixty-five percent of his natural
hearing capacity was restored.
And when the time came for me to have all
of my teeth extracted in preparation for

dentures I BELIEVED – nay, I knew – I
could go through the operation without the
slightest discomfort. I KNEW because
times without number I had seen the
human mind master physical pain and all
other unpleasant circumstances which
people meet from time to time. I KNEW
because I had learned from experience that
my own capacity for BELIEF could remove
all obstacles which got in my way and set
aside all of my self-imposed limitations.
The most profound truth known to man is
the fact that man alone has been given the
inexorable privilege of controlling and
directing his own mind to whatsoever ends
he may choose. All other creatures come
into life bound by a patter of “instinct” which
they cannot change and beyond which they
cannot act. This distinguishing prerogative

suggests that it is the key to man’s control
of his earthly destiny and we know that
neglect or failure to make use of this
prerogative brings definite punishment in
the form of misery, poverty, failure, defeat,
il ness, despair and other negative states
of mind. We know also that the acceptance
and use of this profound prerogative gives
man the key to his own destiny.
Here then is the supreme of miracles –
THE POWER TO TAKE POSSESSION OF
ONE’S OWN MIND AND TO DIRECT IT,
SUCCESSFULLY, TO WHATEVER ENDS
ONE MAY CHOOSE.
And another miracle of only slightly less
distinction consists in the fact that along
with this profound gift of the right of man to
take possession of his own mind, there has

been provided the source of power with
which to make this gift limitless in man’s
achievements. This secondary miracle is
the subconscious section of the mind
through which man may contact and draw
upon the universal power of Infinite
Intelligence.
The method by which one may contact
Infinite Intelligence through the means of
the subconscious mind is simple, it consists
in the repetition of a thought, desire or
purpose, by bringing it into the conscious
mind often and expressing it orally, in a
state of high emotional feeling, thus
enabling the subconscious mind to act
upon it intelligently. The SUBCONSCIOUS
MIND WILL NOT ACT UPON ANY IDEA,
PLAN OR PURPOSE WHICH IS NOT
CLEARLY EXPRESSED TO IT.

In the preceding sentence you have a clue
as to the major reason why so many people
fail to get satisfactory results from their
subconscious minds. Also, you have the
major reason why most people are failures
instead of successes.
When

you

give

directives

to

your

subconscious mind, be definite and clearly
state your desires and you will not be
disappointed, provided you emotionalize
your directives with strong BELIEF that
they will be carried out. By this procedure
the power which operates the Universe will
be at your disposal!

