

Chapter  My First Meeting with Andrew
Carnegie
FOR MORE THAN A QUARTER OF A CENTURY my major purpose has been
that of isolating and organizing into a philosophy of achievement the causes
of both failure and success, with the object of being helpful to others who
have neither the inclination nor the opportunity to engage in this form of
research.
My labor began in , as the result of an interview that I had with the
late Andrew Carnegie. I frankly told Mr. Carnegie that I wished to enter law
school and that I had conceived the idea of paying my way through school by
interviewing successful men and women, finding out how they came by their
success, and writing stories of my discoveries for magazines. At the end of
our first visit Mr. Carnegie asked whether or not I possessed enough courage
to carry out a suggestion he wished to offer me. I replied that courage was
about all I did have and that I was prepared to do my best to carry out any
suggestion he cared to offer.
He then said, "Your idea of writing stories about men and women who
are successful is commendable, as far as it goes, and I have no intention of
trying to discourage you from carrying out your purpose, but I must tell you
that if you wish to be of enduring service, not only to those now living, but to
posterity as well, you can do so if you will take the time to organize all of the
causes of failure as well as all of the causes of success.
"There are millions of people in the world who have not the slightest
conception of the causes of success and failure. The schools and colleges
teach practically everything except the principles of individual achievement.
They require young men and women to spend from four to eight years
acquiring abstract knowledge, but do not teach them what to do with this
knowledge after they get it. "The world is in need of a practical,
understandable philosophy of achievement, organized from the factual
knowledge gained from the experience of men and women in the great
university of life. In the entire field of philosophy I find nothing which even
remotely resembles the sort of philosophy which I have in mind. We have few
philosophers who are capable of teaching men and women the art of living.
"It seems to me that here is an opportunity which should challenge an
ambitious young man of your type; but ambition alone is not enough for this



task which I have suggested. The one who undertakes it must have courage
and tenacity.
"The job will require at least twenty years of continuous effort, during
which the one who undertakes it will have to earn his living from some other
source, because this sort of research is never profitable at the outset, and
generally those who have contributed to civilization through work of this
nature have had to wait a hundred years or so after their own funerals to
receive recognition for their labor."
"If you undertake this job, you should interview not only the few who
have succeeded, but the many who have failed. You should carefully analyze
many thousands of people who have been classed as 'failures,' and I mean by
the term 'failures,' men and women who come to the closing chapter of life
disappointed because they did not attain the goal which they had set their
hearts upon achieving. As inconsistent as it may seem, you will learn more
about how to succeed from the failures than you will from the so-called
successes. They will teach you what not to do.
"Along toward the end of your labor, if you carry it through successfully,
you will make a discovery which may be a great surprise to you. You will
discover that the cause of success is not something separate and apart from
the man; that it is a force so intangible in nature that the majority of men
never recognize it; a force which might be properly called the 'other self.'
Noteworthy is the fact that this 'other self seldom exerts its influence or
makes itself known excepting at times of unusual emergency, when men are
forced, through adversity and temporary defeat, to change their habits and to
think their way out of difficulty.
"My experience has taught me that a man is never quite so near success
as when that which he calls 'failure' has overtaken him, for it is on occasions
of this sort that he is forced to think. If he thinks accurately, and with
persistence, he discovers that so-called failure usually is nothing more than a
signal to re-arm himself with a new plan or purpose. Most real failures are
due to limitations which men set up in their own minds. If they had the
courage to go one step further, they would discover their error."




Begin Life Anew
Mr. Carnegie's speech reshaped my entire life and planted in my mind a
burning purpose, which has driven me ceaselessly, and this despite the fact
that I had but a vague idea as to what he meant by the term "other self."
During my labor of research into the causes of failure and success I have
had the privilege of analyzing more than , men and women who were
rated as "failures," and over  who were classed as "successful." Many years
ago I caught my first glimpse of that "other self Mr. Carnegie had mentioned.
The discovery came, as he said it would, as the result of two major turningpoints of my life, which constituted emergencies that forced me to think my
way out of difficulties such as I had never before experienced.
I wish it were possible to describe this discovery without the use of the
personal pronoun, but this is impossible because it came through personal
experiences from which it cannot be separated. To give you the complete
picture I shall have to go back to the first of these two major turning-points
and bring you up to the discovery step by step.
The research necessary for the accumulation of the data, from which the
seventeen principles of achievement and the thirty major causes of failure
were organized, required years of labor.
I had reached the false conclusion that my task of organizing a complete
philosophy of personal achievement had been completed. Far from having
been completed, my work had merely begun. I had erected the skeleton of a
philosophy by organizing the seventeen principles of achievement and the
thirty major causes of failure, but that skeleton had to be covered with the
flesh of application and experience. Moreover, it had to be given a soul
through which it might inspire men and women to meet obstacles without
going down under them.
The "soul," which had yet to be added, as I discovered later, became
available only after my "other self" made its appearance, through two major
turning-points of my life.
Resolving to turn my attention, and whatever talents I might possess,
into monetary returns through business and professional channels, I decided
to go into the profession of advertising, and I became the advertising
manager of the LaSalle Extension University of Chicago. Everything went



along beautifully for one year, at the end of which I was seized by a violent
dislike for my job and resigned.
I then entered the chain store business, with the former president of the
LaSalle Extension University, and became the president of the Betsy Ross
Candy Company. Unfortunate— or what seemed to me at the time to be
unfortunate— disagreements with business associates disengaged me from
that undertaking.
The lure of advertising still was in my blood, and I tried again to give
expression to it by organizing a school of advertising and salesmanship, as a
part of Bryant & Stratton Business College.
The enterprise was sailing smoothly and we were making money rapidly
when the United States entered World War I. In response to an inner urge
which no words can describe, I walked away from the school and entered the
service of the United States government, under President Woodrow Wilson's
personal direction, leaving a perfectly sound business to disintegrate.
On Armistice Day , I began the publication of The Golden Rule
magazine. Despite the fact that I did not have a penny of capital, the
magazine grew rapidly and soon gained a nation-wide circulation of nearly
half a million, ending its first year's business with a profit of $,.
Some years later I learned, from an experienced publisher, that no man
experienced in the publication and distribution of national magazines would
think of starting such a magazine with less than half a million dollars of
capital.
The Golden Rule magazine and I were destined to part company. The
more we succeeded the more discontented I became, until finally, due to an
accumulation of petty annoyances caused by business associates, I made them
a present of the magazine and stepped out. Through that move perhaps I
tossed a small fortune over my shoulder.
Next I organized a training school for salesmen. My first assignment was
to train a sales army of , people for a chain store company, for which I
received $ for each salesman who went through my classes. Within six
months my work had netted me a little over $,. Success, as far as
money was concerned, was crowning my efforts with abundance. Again I
became "fidgety" inside. I was not happy. It became more obvious every day
that no amount of money would ever make me happy.



Without the slightest reasonable excuse for my actions, I stepped out
and gave up a business from which I might easily have earned a healthy
salary. My friends and business associates thought I was crazy, and they were
not backward about saying so.
Frankly, I was inclined to agree with them, but there seemed nothing I
could do about it. I was seeking happiness and I had not found it. At least that
is the only explanation I could offer for my unusual actions. What man really
knows himself?
That was during the late fall of . I found myself stranded in
Columbus, Ohio, without funds, and worse still, without a plan by which to
work my way out of my difficulty. It was the first time in my life that I had
actually been stranded because of lack of funds.
Many times previously I had found money to be rather shy, but never
before had I failed to get what I needed for my personal conveniences. The
experience stunned me. I seemed totally at sea as to what I could or should
do.
I thought of a dozen plans by which I might solve my problem, but
dismissed them all as being either impractical or impossible of achievement. I
felt like one who was lost in a jungle without a compass. Every attempt I
made to work my way out brought me back to the original starting point.
For nearly two months I suffered with the worst of all human ailments
indecision. I knew the seventeen principles of personal achievement, but
what I did not know was how to apply them! Without knowing it I was facing
one of those emergencies of life through which, Mr. Carnegie had told me,
men sometimes discover their "other selves."
My distress was so great that it never occurred to me to sit down and
analyze its cause and seek its cure.
Defeat Is Converted into Victory
One afternoon I reached a decision through which I found the way out of
my difficulty. I had a feeling that I wanted to get out into the "open spaces"
of the country, where I could get a breath of fresh air and think.
I began to walk, and had gone seven or eight miles when I felt myself
brought suddenly to a standstill. For several minutes I stood there as if I had



been glued to my tracks. Everything around me went dark. I could hear the
loud sound of some form of energy which was vibrating at a very high rate.
Then my nerves became quiet, my muscles relaxed, and a great calmness
came over me. The atmosphere began to clear, and as it did so, I received a
command from within which came in the form of a thought, as near as I can
describe it.
The command was so clear and distinct that I could not misunderstand it.
In substance it said, "The time has come for you to complete the philosophy
of achievement which you began at Carnegie's suggestion. Go back home at
once and begin transferring the data you have gathered from your own mind
to written manuscripts." My "other self" had awakened.
For a few minutes I was frightened. The experience was unlike any I had
ever undergone before. I turned and walked rapidly until I reached home. As I
approached the house, I saw my three little boys looking out of a window of
our house at our neighbor's children, who were dressing a Christmas tree in
the house next door.
Then I recalled that it was Christmas Eve. Moreover, I recalled, with a
feeling of deep distress such as I had never known before, that there would
be no Christmas tree at our house. The look of disappointment on the faces of
my children reminded me painfully of that fact.
I went into the house, sat down at my typewriter, and began at once to
reduce to writing the discoveries I had made concerning the causes of success
and failure. As I placed the first sheet of paper in the typewriter I was
interrupted by that same strange feeling which had come over me out in the
country a few hours before, and this thought flashed into my mind
"Your mission in life is to complete the world's first philosophy of
individual achievement. You have been trying in vain to escape your task,
each effort having brought you failure. You are seeking happiness. Learn this
lesson, once and forever, that you will find happiness only by helping others
to find it! You have been a stubborn student. You had to be cured of your
stubbornness through disappointment. Within a few years from now the whole
world will start through an experience which will place millions of people in
need of the philosophy which you have been directed to complete. Your big
opportunity to find happiness by rendering useful service will have come. Go
to work, and do not stop until you have completed and published the
manuscripts which you have begun."



I was conscious of having arrived, at last, at the end of life's rainbow,
and I was happy!

Doubt Makes Its Appearance
The "spell," if the experience may be so called, passed away. I began to
write. Shortly thereafter my "reason" suggested to me that I was embarking
upon a fool's mission. The idea of a man who was down and almost out
presuming to write a philosophy of personal achievement seemed so ludicrous
that I laughed hilariously, perhaps scornfully.
I squirmed in my chair, ran my fingers through my hair, and tried to
create an alibi that would justify me in my own mind in taking the sheet of
paper out of my typewriter before I had really begun to write, but the urge to
continue was stronger than the desire to quit. I became reconciled to my task
and went ahead.
Looking backward now, in the light of all that has happened, I can see
that those minor experiences of adversity through which I had passed were
among the most fortunate and profitable of all of my experiences. They were
blessings in disguise because they forced me to continue a work which finally
brought me an opportunity to make myself more useful to the world than I
might have been had I succeeded in any previous plan or purpose.
For almost three months I worked on those manuscripts, completing
them during the early part of . As soon as they had been completed, I
felt myself again being lured by the desire to get back into the great
American game of business.
Succumbing to the lure, I purchased the Metropolitan Business College in
Cleveland, Ohio, and began to lay plans for increasing its capacity. By the end
of  we had developed and expanded, by adding new courses, until we
were doing a business nearly double the best previous record the school had
ever known.
Again the germ of discontentment began to make itself felt in my blood.
Again I knew that I could not find happiness in that sort of endeavor. I turned
the business over to my associates and went on the lecture platform,
lecturing on the philosophy of achievement, to the organization of which I
had devoted so many of my previous years.




One night I was booked to lecture in Canton, Ohio. Fate, or whatever it
is that seems sometimes to shape the destiny of men, no matter how hard
they may try to battle against it, again stepped into the picture and brought
me face to face with a painful experience.
In my Canton audience sat Don R. Mellett, publisher of the Canton Daily
News. Mr. Mellett became so thoroughly interested in the philosophy of
individual achievement on which I lectured that night that he invited me to
come to see him the following day.
That visit resulted in a partnership agreement which was to have taken
place on the first of the following January when Mr. Mellett planned to resign
as publisher of the Daily News, to take charge of the business and publishing
of the philosophy on which I had been working.
However, in July , Mr. Mellett was murdered by Pat McDermott, an
underworld character, and a Canton, Ohio, policeman, both of whom were
sentenced to life imprisonment. He was murdered because he was exposing in
his newspaper a hook-up between the boodeggers and certain members of the
Canton police force. The crime was one of the most shocking that the
prohibition era produced.

Chance (?) Saves My Life
The morning after Mr. Mellett's death I was called on the telephone and
put on notice, by some unknown person, that I had one hour in which to get
out of Canton; that I could go voluntarily within the hour, but if I waited
longer I probably would go in a pine box. My business association with Mr.
Mellett had apparently been misunderstood. His murderers evidently believed
I was directly connected with the expose he was making in his newspapers.
I did not wait for the one hour time limit to expire, but immediately got
into my automobile and drove down to the home of relatives in the mountains
of West Virginia, where I remained until the murderers had been placed in
jail.
That experience came well within the category described by Mr.
Carnegie as an "emergency" that forces men to think. For the first time in my
life I knew the pain of constant fear. My experience of a few years before, in
Columbus, had filled my mind with doubt and temporary indecision, but this
one had filled it with a fear which I seemed unable to remove. During the



time that I was in hiding I seldom left the house at night, and when I did step
out I kept my hand on an automatic pistol in my coat pocket, with the safety
catch unlatched for immediate action. If a strange automobile stopped in
front of the house where I was hiding, I went into the basement and carefully
scrutinized its occupants through the basement windows.
After some months of this sort of experience, my nerves began to crack.
My courage had completely left me. The ambition which had heartened me
during the long years of labor in my search for the causes of failure and
success also had departed.
Slowly, step by step, I felt myself slipping into a state of lethargy from
which I was afraid I should never be able to emerge. The feeling must have
been closely akin to that experienced by one who suddenly steps into
quicksand and realizes that every effort to extricate himself carries him just
so much deeper. Fear is a self-generating morass.
If the seed of insanity had been in my make-up, surely it would have
germinated during those months of living death. Foolish indecision, irresolute
dreams, doubt and fear were my mind's concern, day and night.
The "emergency" I faced was disastrous in two ways. First, the very
nature of it kept me in a constant state of indecision and fear. Secondly, the
forced concealment kept me in idleness, with its attendant heaviness of time,
which I naturally devoted to worry.
My reasoning faculty had almost been paralyzed. I realized that I had to
work myself out of this state of mind. But how? The resourcefulness which
had helped me to meet all previous emergencies seemed to have completely
taken wing, leaving me helpless.
Out of my difficulties, which were burdensome enough up to this point,
grew another which seemed more painful than all the others combined. It was
the realization that I had spent the better portion of my past years in chasing
a rainbow, searching hither and yon for the causes of success, and finding
myself now more helpless than any of the , people whom I had judged
as being "failures."
This thought was almost maddening. Moreover, it was extremely
humiliating, because I had been lecturing all over the country, in schools and
colleges and before business organizations, presuming to tell other people
how to apply the seventeen principles of success, while here I was, unable to



apply them myself. I was sure that I never could again face the world with a
feeling of confidence.
Every time I looked at myself in a mirror I noticed an expression of selfcontempt on my face, and not infrequently I did say things to the man in the
mirror which are not printable. I had begun to place myself in the category of
charlatans who offer others a remedy for failure which they themselves
cannot successfully apply.
The criminals who had murdered Mr. Mellett had been tried and sent to
the penitentiary for life; therefore, it was perfectly safe, as far as they were
concerned, for me to come out of hiding and again take up my work. I could
not come out, however, because now I faced circumstances more frightful
than the criminals who had sent me into hiding.
The experience had destroyed whatever initiative I had possessed. I felt
myself in the clutches of some depressing influence which seemed like a
nightmare. I was alive; I could move around, but I could not think of a single
move by which I might continue to seek the goal which I had, at Mr.
Carnegie's suggestion, set for myself. I was rapidly becoming indifferent, not
only toward myself, but worse still, I was becoming grouchy and irritable
toward those who had given me shelter during my "emergency."
I faced the greatest emergency of my life. Unless you have gone through
a similar experience, you cannot possibly know how I felt. Such experiences
cannot be described. To be understood they must be felt.

The Most Dramatic Moment of My Life
The turn came suddenly, in fall , more than a year after the Canton
incident. I left the house one night and walked up to the public school
building, on top of a hill above the town.
I had reached a decision to fight the matter out with myself before that
night ended. I began to walk around the building, trying to force my
befuddled brain to think clearly. I must have made several hundred trips
around the building before anything which even remotely resembled
organized thought began to take place in my mind. As I walked I repeated
over and over to myself, "There is a way out and I am going to find it before I
go back to the house." I must have repeated that sentence a thousand times.




Moreover, I meant exactly what I was saying. I was thoroughly disgusted with
myself, but I entertained a hope of salvation.
Then like a flash of lightning out of a clear sky, an idea burst into my
mind with such force that the impulse drove my blood up and down my veins
"This is your testing time. You have been reduced to poverty and
humiliated in order that you might be forced to discover your 'other self"
For the first time in years I recalled what Mr. Carnegie had said about
this "other self." I recalled now that he said I would discover it toward the
end of my labor of research into the causes of failure and success, and that
the discovery usually came as the result of an emergency, when men are
forced to change their habits and to think their way out of difficulty.
I continued to walk around the school house, but now I was walking on
air. Subconsciously I seemed to know that I was about to be released from the
self-made prison into which I had cast myself.
I realized that this great emergency had brought me an opportunity, not
merely to discover my "other self," but to test the soundness of the
philosophy of achievement which I had been teaching others as being
workable. Soon I would know whether it would work or not. I made up my
mind that if it did not work I would burn the manuscripts I had written and
never again be guilty of telling other people that they were "the masters of
their fate, the captains of their souls."
The full moon was just rising over the mountain top. I had never seen it
shine so brightly before. As I stood gazing at it, another thought flashed into
my mind. It was this
"You have been telling other people how to master fear and how to
surmount the difficulties which arise out of the emergencies of life. From
now on you can speak with authority because you are about to rise above
your own difficulties with courage and purpose, resolute and unafraid."
With that thought came a change in the chemistry of my being which
lifted me into a state of exultation I had never before known. My brain began
to clear itself of the state of lethargy into which it had lapsed. My faculty of
reason began to work once more.
For a brief moment I was happy to have had the privilege of going
through those long months of torment, because the experience provided an



opportunity for me to test the soundness of the principles of achievement
which I had so laboriously wrested from my research.
When this thought came to me, I stopped still, drew my feet closely
together, saluted (I did not know what or whom), and stood rigidly at
attention for several minutes. This seemed, at first, like a foolish thing to do,
but while I was standing there another thought came through in the form of
an "order" that was as brief and snappy as any ever given by a military
commander to a subordinate.
The order said, "Tomorrow get into your automobile and drive to
Philadelphia, where you will receive aid in publishing your philosophy of
achievement."
There was no further explanation and no modification of the order. As
soon as I received it, I walked back to the house, went to bed, and slept with
peace of mind such as I had not known for over a year.
When I awoke the following morning, I got out of bed and immediately
began to pack my clothes and make ready for the trip to Philadelphia. My
reason told me that I was embarking upon a fool's mission. Who did I know in
Philadelphia to whom I might apply for financial aid in publishing eight
volumes of books at a cost of $,? I asked myself.
Instantly the answer to that question flashed into my mind, as plainly as
if it had been uttered in audible words "You are following orders now,
instead of asking questions. Your 'other self will be in charge during this trip."
There was another condition which seemed to make my preparation to
go to Philadelphia absurd. I had no money!
This thought had barely occurred to me when my "other self" exploded it
by giving another sharp order, saying, "Ask your brother-in-law for fifty dollars
and he will lend it to you."
The order seemed definite and final. Without further hesitation I
followed instructions. When I asked my brother-in-law for the money, he said,
"Why, certainly you can have fifty dollars, but if you are going to be gone very
long you had better take a hundred dollars." I thanked him and said I thought
fifty dollars would be enough. I knew it was not enough, but that was the
amount my "other self" had commanded me to ask for and that is the amount
I secured.



I was greatly relieved when I found that my brother-inlaw was not going
to ask me why I was going to Philadelphia. If he had known all that had taken
place in my mind during the previous night, he perhaps would have thought I
should go to a psychiatric hospital for treatment instead of going to
Philadelphia on a wild-goose chase.
My "Other Self Takes Command
I left with my head telling me I was a fool and my "other self"
commanding me to ignore the challenge and carry out my instructions.
I drove all night, arriving in Philadelphia the next morning. My first
thought was to look up a modestly priced boarding house where I could rent a
room for about one dollar a day.
Here again my "other self" took charge and gave the command to register
at the most exclusive hotel in the city. With a little more than forty dollars of
my remaining capital in my pocket, it seemed like financial suicide when I
marched up to the desk and asked for a room; or rather I should say I started
to ask for a room when my newly discovered "other self" gave the order to ask
for a suite of rooms, the cost of which would about consume my remaining
capital in two days. I obeyed.
The bell-boy picked up my bags, handed me my claim check for my
automobile, and bowed me toward the elevator as if I were the Prince of
Wales. It was the first time in more than a year that any human being had
shown me such deference. My own relatives, with whom I had been living, far
from having shown me deference, had (so I imagined) felt I was a burden on
their hands, and I am sure that I was, because no man in the frame of mind
that I had been in for the past year could be anything other than a burden to
all with whom he came into contact.
It was becoming apparent that my "other self" was determined to wean
me away from the inferiority complex which I had developed.
I tossed the bell-boy a dollar. I started to estimate what my hotel bill
would be by the end of the week when my "other self" commanded me to get
my mind entirely off of all thoughts of limitation, and to conduct myself, for
the time being, just as I would if I had all the money I wanted in my pockets.
The experience I was passing through was both new and strange to me. I
had never posed as being anything other than what I believed myself to be.



For nearly half an hour this "other self" gave orders which I followed to
the letter during the subsequent period of my stay in Philadelphia. The
instructions were given through the medium of thoughts which presented
themselves in my mind with such force that they were readily distinguishable
from my ordinary self-created thoughts.

I Receive Strange "Orders" from a Strange Source
My instructions began in this fashion
"You are now completely in charge of your 'other self.' You are entitled
to know that two entities occupy your body, as in fact two similar entities
occupy the body of each living person on earth.
"One of these entities is motivated by and responds to the impulse of
fear. The other is motivated by and responds to the impulse of faith. For
more than a year you have been driven, like a slave, by the fear entity.
"Night before last the faith entity gained control over your physical body,
and you are now motivated by that entity. For the sake of convenience you
may call this faith entity your 'other self.' It knows no limitations, has no
fears, and recognizes no such word as 'impossible.'
"You were directed to select this environment of luxury, in a good hotel,
as a means of discouraging the return to power of the fear entity. That fearmotivated 'old self is not dead; it has merely been dethroned. And it will
follow you around wherever you go, awaiting a favorable opportunity to step
in and take charge of you again. It can gain control of you only through your
thoughts. Remember this, and keep the doors to your mind tightly closed
against all thoughts which seek to limit you in any manner whatsoever, and
you will be safe.
"Do not permit yourself to worry about the money you will need for your
immediate expenses. That will come to you by the time you must have it.
"Now, let us get down to business. First of all you should know that the
faith entity now in charge of your body performs no miracles, nor does it
work in opposition to any of nature's laws. As long as it is in charge of your
body it will guide you when you call on it, through impulses of thought which
it will place in your mind, in carrying out your plans through the most logical
and convenient natural media available.



"Above everything else, get this fact clearly fixed in your mind, that your
'other self will not do your work for you; it will only guide you intelligently in
achieving for yourself the objects of your desires.
"This 'other self will aid you in translating your plans into reality.
Moreover, you should know that it begins, always, with your major, or most
pronounced desire. At this time your major desire— the one which brought
you here— is to publish and distribute the results of your research into the
causes of success and failure. You estimate that you will need approximately
$,.
"Among your acquaintances there is a man who will supply you with this
needed capital. Begin, at once, to call into your mind the names of all
persons of your acquaintance whom you have reason to believe might be
induced to furnish the financial aid you require.
"When the name of the logical person comes into your mind, you will
recognize it immediately. Communicate with that person and the aid you
seek will be given. In your approach, however, present your request in
terminology such as you would use in the usual course of business
transactions. Make no reference whatsoever to this introduction you have had
to your 'other self If you violate these instructions, you will meet with
temporary defeat.
"Your 'other self will remain in charge and continue to direct you as long
as you rely upon it. Keep doubt and fear and worry, and all thoughts of
limitation, entirely out of your mind.
"That will be all for the present. You will now begin to move of your own
free will, precisely as you did before you discovered your 'other self.
Physically you are the same as you have always been; therefore, no one will
recognize that any change has taken place in you."
I looked around the room, blinked my eyes, and to make sure that I was
not dreaming, I got up and walked over to a mirror and looked at myself
closely. The expression on my face had changed from one of doubt to one of
courage and faith.
There was no longer any doubt in my mind that my physical body was in
charge of an influence far different from the one which had been dethroned
two nights before, as I walked around that school house in West Virginia.



Chapter  A New World Is Revealed to
Me
OBVIOUSLY I HAD UNDERGONE A NEW BIRTH by which I had been
separated from all forms of fear. I now had courage such as I never before
had experienced. Despite the fact that I had not as yet been shown how, or
from what source, I would be able to secure the necessary funds which I was
seeking, I had such absolute faith that the money would be forthcoming that I
could see it already in my possession.
On but few occasions in my entire life have I experienced such faith. It
was a feeling which one person cannot describe to another. There are no
words in the English language suitable for such a description— a fact that all
who have had similar experiences can easily verify.
I proceeded immediately to carry out the instructions I had received. All
feeling that I had embarked upon an impossible mission had now left me. One
by one I began to call into my mind the names of all my acquaintances I knew
to be financially able to supply me with the $, which I needed, starting
with the name of Henry Ford, and going over the entire list of more than
three hundred people. My "other self plainly said, "Keep on searching."

The Darkest Hour Is Just Before Dawn
But I had come to the end of my rope. My entire list of acquaintances
had been exhausted, and with it my physical endurance as well. I had been at
work, concentrating my mind upon that list of names, for the better part of
two days and nights, having stopped only long enough to sleep for a few
hours.
I leaned back in my chair, shut my eyes, and went into a sort of doze for
a few minutes. I was aroused by what seemed to be an explosion in the room.
As I regained consciousness the name of Albert L. Pelton came into my mind .
. . and with it a plan which I knew instantly to be the plan through which I
would succeed in getting Mr. Pelton to publish my books. I remembered Mr.
Pelton only as an advertiser in The Golden Rule magazine, which I had
formerly published. I sent for a typewriter, addressed a letter to Mr. Pelton
at Meriden, Connecticut, and described the plan just as it had been handed



over to me. He answered by telegram, saying that he would be in
Philadelphia to see me the following day.
When he came I showed him the original manuscripts of my philosophy,
and briefly explained what I believed its mission to be. He turned through the
pages of the manuscripts for a few minutes, then stopped suddenly and fixed
his eyes on the wall for a few seconds and said, "I will publish your books for
you."
The contract was drawn; a substantial advance payment on royalties was
given me, the manuscripts were turned over to him, and he took them back
to Meriden.
I did not ask him at the time what caused him to reach a decision to
publish my books before he had read the manuscripts, but I do know that he
supplied the necessary capital, printed the books, and assisted me in selling
many thousands of sets of them to his own clientele of book buyers, who
were located in practically every English-speaking country in the world.

My "Other Self" Makes Good
Three months from the day that Mr. Pelton called on me in Philadelphia,
a completed set of my books was placed on the table in front of me, and my
income from the sale of the books began to run high enough for all my needs.
These books are now in the hands of my students all over the world.
My first royalty check from the sale of my books was for $. As I
opened the envelope in which it came, my "other self" said, "Your only
limitation is the one which you set up in your own mind!"
I am not sure that I understand just what this "other self" is, but I do
know that there can be no permanent defeat for the man or the woman who
discovers it and relies upon it.
The day after Mr. Pelton came to see me in Philadelphia, my other self
presented me with an idea which solved my immediate financial problem.
The idea flashed into my mind that automobile merchandising methods had to
undergo a drastic change and that future salesmen in this field would have to
learn to sell automobiles instead of merely serving as buyers of used car
trade-ins, as most of them were doing at the time.




It also occurred to me that young men who had just finished college and
who, therefore, knew nothing of the old "tricks" of automobile merchandising
would be the material out of which this new brand of salesmen could best be
developed.
The idea was so distinct and impressive that I immediately called the
sales manager of the General Motors Company on long-distance telephone and
briefly explained my plan to him. He too was impressed by it and referred me
to the West Philadelphia branch of the Buick Automobile Company, which was
then owned and managed by Earl Powell. I went to see Mr. Powell, explained
my plan to him, and he retained me at once to train fifteen carefully selected
young college men through whom the plan was put into operation.
My income from that retainer was more than enough to take care of all
of my expenses for the following three months, until the returns from the
sale of my books began to come in, including the cost of that expensive suite
of rooms, over which I had at first been so concerned.
My "other self" had not disappointed me. The money I needed was in my
hands at the proper time, just as I had been assured the money would be. By
this time I had been convinced that my trip to Philadelphia was by no means a
fool's mission, as my reason had indicated it would be before I left West
Virginia.
From that time right up to this very minute everything I have needed has
come to me, and this despite the fact that the whole world has recently
passed through a period of economic depression, when the bare necessities of
life have not always been available to all people. Sometimes the arrival of
the material things I needed has been a little late, but I can truthfully say
that my "other self" has always met me at the cross-roads when I have come
to them, and indicated which path I should follow.
The "other self follows no precedents, recognizes no limitations, and
always finds a way to accomplish desired ends! It may meet with temporary
defeat, but not with permanent failure. I am as sure of the soundness of this
statement as I am of the fact of being engaged in writing these lines.
Meanwhile, I earnestly hope that some of the millions of men and women
who have been wounded by the business depression and other unpleasant
experiences will discover within themselves this strange entity which I have
called my "other self," and that the discovery will lead them, as it has led me,
into a closer relationship with that source of power which surmounts



obstacles and masters difficulties, instead of being mastered by them. There
is a great power to be discovered in your "other self"! Search sincerely and
you will find it.

"Failure" A Blessing in Disguise
I have made another discovery as the result of this introduction to my
"other self," namely, that there is a solution for every legitimate problem, no
matter how difficult the problem may seem.
I have also discovered that there comes with every experience of
temporary defeat, and every failure and every form of adversity, the seed of
an equivalent benefit.
Mind you, I did not say the full-blown flower of success, but the seed
from which that flower may be made to germinate and grow. I know of no
exception to this rule. The seed of which I speak may not always be observed,
but you may be sure it is there, in one form or another.
I do not pretend to understand all about this strange force which
reduced me to poverty and want, and filled me with fear, and then gave me a
new birth of faith through which I have been privileged to extend help to tens
of thousands who found themselves slipping. But I do know that such a force
has come into my life and that I am doing all I can to place others in
communication with it.
During my quarter-century of research into the causes of success and
failure I have discovered many principles of truth which have been helpful to
me and to others, but nothing I have observed has impressed me more than
the discovery that every great leader of the past, whose record I have
examined, was beset by difficulties and met with temporary defeat before
"arriving."
From Christ on down to Edison, the men who have achieved most have
been those who met with the most stubborn forms of temporary defeat. This
would seem to justify the conclusion that Infinite Intelligence has a plan, or a
law, by which it hurdles men over many obstacles before giving them the
privilege of leadership or the opportunity to render useful service in a
noteworthy fashion.
I would not wish to be again subjected to the experiences through which
I passed during that fateful Christmas Eve in , and since, on that eventful



evening when I walked around the school house in West Virginia and fought
that terrible battle with fear, but all the wealth in the world would not
induce me to divest myself of the knowledge I have gained from those
experiences.

Faith Has a New Meaning to Me
I repeat that I do not know exactly what this "other self" is, but I know
enough about it to lean upon it in a spirit of absolute faith in times of
difficulty, when the ordinary reasoning faculty of my mind seems to be
inadequate for my needs.
The economic depression which started in  brought misery to
millions of people, but let us not forget that the experience also brought
many blessings, not the least of these being the knowledge that there is
something infinitely worse than being forced to work. It is being forced not to
work. In the main, that depression was more of a blessing than it was a curse,
if analyzed in the light of the changes it brought to the minds of those who
were wounded by it. The same is true of every experience which changes
men's habits and forces them to turn to the great "within" for the solution of
their problems. The time which I spent in seclusion in West Virginia was, by
great odds, the most severe punishment of my life, but the experience
brought blessings in the form of needed knowledge which more than offset
the suffering which it cost me. These two results— the suffering and the
knowledge gained from it— were inevitable. The law of compensation, which
Emerson so clearly defined, made this result both natural and necessary.
What the future may hold for me in the way of disappointment, through
temporary defeat, I of course have no way of knowing. I do know, however,
that no experience of the future can possibly wound me as deeply as have
some of those of the past, because I am now on speaking terms at least with
my "other self."
Since this "other self" took charge of me, I have come by useful
knowledge which I am sure I never would have discovered while my old fear
entity was on the throne. For one thing I have learned that those who meet
with difficulties which seem insurmountable may, if they will do so, best
overcome these difficulties by forgetting them for a time and helping others
who have greater problems.




The Value of Giving Before Trying to Get
I am sure that no effort which we extend to those who are in distress can
go without some form of adequate reward. Not always does the reward come
from those to whom the service is rendered, but it will come from one source
or another.
I seriously doubt that any man can avail himself of the benefits of his
"other self" as long as he is steeped in greed and avarice, envy and fear, but if
I am wrong in this conclusion then I still have the unusual honor of being one
who has found peace of mind and happiness through a viewpoint that was not
sound. I would prefer being thus wrong and happy, to being right and
unhappy! But this viewpoint is not wrong!
As long as I remain on good terms with my "other self" I shall be able to
acquire every material thing that I need. Moreover, I shall be able to find
happiness and peace of mind. What more could anyone else accomplish?
The sole motive which inspired me to write this book was a sincere
desire to be helpful to others by sharing with them as much as they may be
prepared to accept of the stupendous fortune which became mine the
moment I discovered my "other self." This fortune, happily, is one that cannot
be measured in material or financial terms alone, because it is greater than
everything which such things represent.
Material and financial fortunes, when reduced to their most liquid terms,
are measurable in terms of bank balances. Bank balances are no stronger than
banks. This other fortune of which I speak is measurable, not only in terms of
peace of mind and contentment but as manifested in those adept at prayer.
My "other self" has taught me to concentrate upon my purpose and to
forget about the plan by which it is to be attained when I go to prayer. I am
not suggesting that material objects may be acquired without plans. What I
am saying is that the power which translates one's thoughts or desires into
realities has its source in an Infinite Intelligence which knows more about
plans than the one doing the praying.
Stating the case in another way, may it not be wise, when praying, to
trust to the Universal Mind to hand over the plan best suited for the
attainment of the object of that prayer? My experience with prayer has
taught me that so often all which results from prayer is a plan (if the prayer
is answered at all), a plan that is suited for the attainment of the object of



the prayer through natural and material media. The plan must be
transmuted, through self-effort action.
I know nothing about any form of prayer which can be induced to work
favorably in a mind that is colored, in the slightest degree, by fear.

A New Way to Pray
Since becoming better acquainted with my "other self," my way of
praying is different from what it was before. I used to go to prayer only when
facing difficulty. Now I go to prayer before difficulty overtakes me, when
possible. I now pray, not for more of this world's goods and greater blessings,
but to be worthy of that which I already have. I find that this plan is better
than the old one.
Infinite Intelligence seems not at all offended when I give thanks and
show that I am grateful for the blessings which have crowned my efforts. I
was astounded, when I first tried this plan of offering a prayer of thanks for
what I already possessed, to discover what a vast fortune I had owned without
being appreciative of it.
For example, I discovered that I possessed a sound body which had never
been seriously damaged by illness. I had a mind which was reasonably well
balanced. I had a creative imagination through which I could render useful
service to great numbers of people. I was blessed with all the freedom I
desired, in both body and mind. I possessed an imperishable desire to help
others who were less fortunate.
I discovered that happiness, the highest aim of mankind, was mine for
the taking, business depression or no business depression.
Last, but by no means least, I discovered that I had the privilege of
approaching Infinite Intelligence, either for the purpose of offering thanks for
what I already possessed, or to ask for more, and for guidance.
It may be helpful for every reader of this book to take inventory of his or
her intangible assets. Such an inventory may disclose possessions of priceless
value.




Some Signs We Have Overlooked
The whole world is undergoing a change of such stupendous proportions
that millions of people have become panicstricken with worry, doubt,
indecision, and fear! It seems to me that now is a splendid time for those who
have come to the cross-roads of doubt to endeavor to become acquainted
with their "other selves."
All who wish to do so will find it helpful if they take a lesson from
nature. Observation will show that the eternal stars shine nightly in their
accustomed places; that the sun continues to send down its rays of warmth,
causing Mother Earth to yield an over-abundance of food and clothing; that
water continues to flow down hill; that the birds of the air and the wild
animals of the forest receive their accustomed requirements of food; that
useful day follows restful night; that busy summer follows the inactive
winter; that the seasons come and go precisely as they did before the 
depression began; that, in reality, only men's minds have ceased to function
normally, and this, because men have filled their minds with fear.
Observation of these simple facts of everyday life may be helpful as a starting
point for those who wish to supplant fear by faith.
I am not a prophet, but I can, with all due modesty, predict that every
individual has the power to change his or her material or financial status by
first changing the nature of his or her beliefs.
Do not confuse the word "belief" with the word "wish." The two are not
the same. Everyone is capable of "wishing" for financial, material, or spiritual
advantages, but the element of faith is the only sure power by which a wish
may be translated into a belief, and a belief into reality.
And right here is an appropriate place at which to call attention to a real
benefit which anyone may experience by deliberately using faith in focusing
attention upon any form of constructive desire. The mind acts upon one's
dominating, or most pronounced desires. There is no escape from this fact. It
is a fact indeed. "Be careful what you set your heart upon, for it surely shall
be yours."

Faith Is the Beginning of All Great Achievement
If Edison had stopped by merely wishing for the secret with which
electric energy might be harnessed and made to serve through the



incandescent lamp, that convenience to civilization would have remained
among nature's multifarious secrets. He met with temporary defeat more
than , times before wresting this secret from nature. It was finally
yielded up to him because he believed it would be, and he kept on trying
until he had the answer.
Edison uncovered more of nature's secrets (they might have been called
"miracles" at an earlier period) in the realm of physics than did any other man
who ever lived, and this because he became acquainted with his "other self." I
have his own word for this, but even if I did not have it, his achievements of
themselves have disclosed the secret in their unfoldment.
Nothing within reason is impossible to the man who knows and relies
upon his "other self." Whatever man believes to be true has a way of
becoming true.
A prayer is a released thought, sometimes expressed in audible words
and at other times expressed silently. I have observed by experience that a
silent prayer is as efficacious as the one which is expressed in words. I have
observed also that one's state of mind is the determining factor when prayer
works, as well as when it does not.
My conception of the "other self" which I have tried to describe is that it
merely symbolizes a newly discovered approach to Infinite Intelligence, an
approach which one may control and direct through the simple process of
mixing faith with one's thoughts. This is only another way of saying that I now
have greater faith in the power of prayer.
The state of mind known as faith apparently opens to one the medium of
a sixth sense through which one may communicate with sources of power and
information far surpassing any available through the five physical senses.
There comes to your aid, and to do your bidding, with the development of the
sixth sense, a strange power which, let us assume, is a guardian angel who
can open to you at all times the door to the Temple of Wisdom. The "sixth
sense" comes as near to being a miracle as anything I have ever experienced,
and it appears so perhaps because I do not understand the method by which
this principle is operated.
This much I do know— that there is a power or a first cause, or an
Intelligence which permeates every atom of matter, and embraces every unit
of energy perceptible to man; that this Infinite Intelligence converts acorns
into oak trees, causes water to flow downhill in response to the law of



gravity, follows night with day, and winter with summer, each maintaining its
proper place and relationship to the other. This Intelligence may aid in
transmuting one's desires into concrete or material form. I have this
knowledge because I have experimented with it and have experienced it.
I have for many years followed the habit of taking personal inventory of
myself once a year, for the purpose of determining how many of my
weaknesses I have bridged or eliminated, and to ascertain what progress, if
any, I had made during the year.




Chapter  A Strange Interview with the
Devil
WHILE YOU ARE READING THE INTERVIEW with the Devil, you will
recognize from the brief description I have given you of the history of my life
what a desperate effort the Devil made to muzzle me before I gained public
recognition. You will understand also, after reading the interview with the
Devil, why the interview had to be preceded by this personal history of my
background.
Before you begin to read the interview, I want you to have a clear
picture of the final fling the Devil had at me, and be it remembered with
profit that it was this final fling which gave mercy a chance to turn and twist
the Devil's tail until he squealed out his confession.
The Devil's undoing began with the depression in . Through that
fortunate turn of the Wheel of Life, I lost my -acre estate in the Catskill
Mountains; my income was entirely cut off; the Harriman National Bank, in
which all my funds were deposited, folded up and was wiped out. Before I
realized what was happening, I found myself caught up in a spiritual and
economic hurricane which evolved into a worldwide catastrophe of such force
that no individual or group of individuals could withstand it.
While waiting for the storm to cease and the stampede of human fear to
stop, I moved to Washington, D.C., the city from which I made my start after
my first meeting with Andrew Carnegie, nearly a quarter of a century
previously.
There seemed nothing for me to do except sit down and wait. All I had
was time. After three years of waiting without tangible results, my restless
soul began to push me back into service.
There was little opportunity for me to teach a philosophy of success
when the world around me was in the midst of abject failure, and men's
minds were filled with the fear of poverty.
This thought came to me one evening while I was sitting in my
automobile, in front of the Lincoln Memorial on the Potomac River, within the
shadow of the Capitol. With it came another thought The world had staged
an unprecedented depression over which no human being had control. With



that depression had come to me an opportunity to test the philosophy of selfdetermination, to the organization of which I had devoted the better portion
of my adult life. Once more I had the opportunity to learn whether my
philosophy was practical or mere theory.
I realized too the opportunity had come to test a claim I had made
hundreds of times that "every adversity brings with it the seed of an
equivalent advantage." What, if any, I asked myself, were the advantages to
me of a world depression?
When I began to look for a direction in which I might move to test my
philosophy, I made the most shocking discovery of my life. I discovered that
through some strange power which I did not understand, I had lost my
courage; my initiative had been demoralized; my enthusiasm had been
weakened. Worst of all, I was sorely ashamed to acknowledge that I was the
author of a philosophy of self-determination, because down deep in my heart
I knew, or thought I knew, that I could not make my philosophy pull me out of
the hole of despair in which I found myself.
While I floundered in a state of mental bewilderment, the Devil must
have been dancing a jig of rejoicing. At last he had "the author of the world's
first philosophy of individual achievement" pinned under his thumb and
paralyzed with indecision.
But the Devil's opposition must have been at work too!
+++++++++++++
As I sat there in front of the Lincoln Memorial, reviewing in retrospect
the circumstances which had so many times previously lifted me to great
heights of achievement, only to let me drop to equal depths of despair, a
happy thought was handed over to me in the form of a definite plan of action
by which I believed I could throw off that hypnotic feeling of indifference
with which I had been bound.
In the interview with the Devil, the exact nature of the power by which I
had been deprived of my initiative and courage has been described. It is the
same power with which millions of others were bound during the Great
Depression. It is the chief weapon with which the Devil ensnares and controls
human beings.




The sum and substance of this thought which came to me was this
Despite the fact that I had learned from Andrew Carnegie and more than five
hundred others of equal business and professional achievements that
noteworthy achievements in all walks of life come through the application of
the Master Mind (the harmonious coordination of two or more minds working
to a definite end), I had failed to make such an alliance for the purpose of
carrying out my plan to take the philosophy of individual achievement to the
world.
Despite the fact I had understood the power of the Master Mind, I had
neglected to appropriate and use this power. I had been laboring as a "lone
wolf instead of allying myself with other and superior minds.

An Analysis
Let us now briefly analyze the strange interview you are about to begin.
Some who read will want to ask, after they finish it, "Did you really interview
the Devil, or did you merely interview an imaginary Devil?" Some may wish
the answer to this question before they begin the interview.
I will answer in the only truthful way I could answer ... by saying that
the Devil I interviewed may have been real, just as he claimed to be, or he
may have been the creation of my own imagination. Whichever he was,
whether real or imaginary, is of little importance compared with the nature
of the information conveyed through the interview.
The important question is this Does the interview convey dependable
information which may be helpful to people who are trying to find their
places in the world? If it conveys that sort of information, no matter whether
it is conveyed in the form of fact or fiction, then it is worthy of serious
analysis through careful reading. I am not concerned in the least as to the
real source of the information or as to the real nature of the Devil whose
astounding story you are about to read. I am concerned only with the fact
that the Devil's confession squares perfectly with what I have seen of life.
I believe the interview does convey information of practical benefit to
all who have not found life to be friendly, and the reason I believe so is the
fact that I have made the central theme of this book yield to me all the
happiness I need, in the form best suited to my nature.




I have had experience with enough of the principles mentioned by the
Devil to assure me that they will do exactly what he says they will. That is
enough for me. So I pass the story of the interview on to you for whatever you
may be able to make it pay in useful dividends.
Perhaps you will get the greatest values if you accept the Devil as being
what he claims himself to be, relying upon his message for whatever it may
bring you that you can use, and not worrying as to who the Devil is or whether
he exists.
If you want my honest personal opinion, I believe the Devil is exactly
who he claims to be. Now let us analyze his strange confession.
After forcing his way into the consciousness of the Devil, "Mr.
Earthbound" began the unwilling interview with questions which could not be
evaded . . .

Here Begins the Interview with the Devil
Q I have uncovered the secret code by which I can pick up your thoughts.
I have come to ask you some very plain questions. I demand that you give me
direct and truthful answers. Are you ready for the interview, Mr. Devil?
A Yes, I am ready, but you must address me with more respect. During
this interview you will address me as "Your Majesty."
Q By what right do you demand such royal respect?
A You should know I control  percent of the people of your world. Do
you not think that entitles me to rate as royalty?
Q Have you proof of your claim?
A Yes, plenty of it.
Q Of what does your proof consist?
A Of many things. If you want answers, you will address me as "Your
Majesty." Some things you will understand; some you will not. In order that
you may get my viewpoint, I shall describe myself and correct the false
notions people have of me and my place of abode.




Q That is a fine idea, Your Majesty. Start by telling me where you live.
Then describe your physical appearance.
A My physical appearance? Why, my dear Mr. Earthbound, I have no
physical body. I would be handicapped by such an encumbrance as those in
which you earthbound creatures live. I consist of negative energy, and I live
in the minds of people who fear me. I also occupy one-half of every atom of
physical matter and every unit of mental and physical energy. Perhaps you
will better understand my nature if I tell you I am the negative portion of the
atom.
Q Oh, I see what you are preparing to claim. You are laying the
foundation to say that if it were not for you, there would be no world, no
stars, no electrons, no atoms, no human beings, nothing. Is that correct?
A True ! Absolutely true.
Q Well, if you only occupy one-half of energy and matter, who occupies
the other half?
A The other half is occupied by my opposition.
Q Opposition? What do you mean?
A The opposition is what you earthbound call God.
Q So you have the universe divided up with God. Is that your claim?
A Not my claim, but the actual fact. Before this interview is finished you
will understand why my claim is true. You will also understand why it has to
be true, or there could be no world such as yours, no earthbound creatures
such as you. I am no beast with a forked tongue and a spiked tail.
Q But you do control the minds of  out of every  people. You said
so yourself. Who causes all the misery in this  percent Devil-controlled
world, if you do not?
A I have not said that I do not cause all the misery of the world. On the
other hand, I boast of it. It is my business to represent the negative side of
everything, including the thoughts of you earthbound people. How else could
I control people? My opposition controls positive thought. I control negative
thought.
Q How do you gain control of the minds of people?



A Oh, that is easy I merely move in and occupy the unused space of the
human brain. I sow the seeds of negative thought in the minds of people so I
can occupy and control the space!
Q You must have many tricks and devices by which you gain and hold
control of the human mind.
A To be sure, I employ tricks and devices to control human thought. My
devices are clever ones too.
Q Go ahead and describe your clever tricks, Your Majesty.
A One of my cleverest devices for mind control is fear. I plant the seed
of fear in the minds of people, and as these seeds germinate and grow,
through use, I control the space they occupy. The six most effective fears are
the fear of poverty, criticism, ill health, loss of love, old age, and death. Q
Which of these six fears serves you most often, Your Majesty?
A The first and the last— poverty and death! At one time or another
during life I tighten my grip on all people through one or both of these. I
plant these fears in the minds of people so deftly that they believe them to
be their own creation. I accomplish this end by making people believe I am
standing just beyond the entrance gate of the next life, waiting to claim
them after death for eternal punishment. Of course I cannot punish anyone,
except in that person's own mind, through some form of fear— but fear of the
thing which does not exist is just as useful to me as fear of that which does
exist. All forms of fear extend the space I occupy in the human mind
Q Your Majesty, will you explain how you gained this control over human
beings?
A The story is too long to be told in a few words. It began over a million
years ago, when the first man began to think. Up to that time I had control
over all mankind, but enemies of mine discovered the power of positive
thought, placed it in the minds of men, and then began a battle on my part to
remain in control. So far, I have done quite well by myself, having lost only 
percent of the people to the opposition.
Q I take it from your answer that men who think are your enemies. Is
that right?
A It is not right, but it is correct.



Q Tell me something more about the world in which you live.
A I live wherever I choose. Time and space do not exist for me. I am a
force best described to you as energy. My favorite physical dwelling place, as
I have told you, is the minds of the earthbound. I control a part of the brain
space of every human being. The amount of space I occupy in each
individual's mind depends upon how little and what sort of thinking that
person does. As I have told you, I cannot entirely control any person who
thinks.
Q You speak of your opposition. What do you mean by that?
A My opponent controls all the positive forces of the world, such as love,
faith, hope, and optimism. My opponent also controls the positive factors of
all natural law throughout the universe, the forces which keep the earth and
the planets and all the stars balanced in their courses, but these forces are
meek in comparison with those which operate in the human mind under my
control. You see, I do not seek to control stars and planets. I prefer the
control of human minds.
Q Where did you acquire your power, and by what means do you add to
it?
A I add to my power by appropriating the mind-power of the earthbound,
as they come through the gate at the time of death. Ninety-eight out of every
 who come back to my plane from the earth plane are taken over by me
and their mind-power is added to my being. I get all who come over with any
form of fear. You see I am constantly at work, preparing the minds of people
before death, so I can appropriate them when they come back to my plane.
Q Will you tell me how you go about your job of preparing human minds
so you can control them?
A I have countless ways of gaining control of human minds while they are
still on the earth plane. My greatest weapon is poverty. I deliberately
discourage people from accumulating material wealth because poverty
discourages men from thinking and makes them easy prey for me. My next
best friend is ill health. An unhealthy body discourages thinking. Then I have
countless thousands of workers on earth who aid me in gaining control of
human minds. I have these agents placed in every calling. They represent
every race and creed, every religion.



Q Who are your greatest enemies on earth, Your Majesty?
A All who inspire people to think and act on their own initiative are my
enemies. Such men as Socrates, Confucius, Voltaire, Emerson, Thomas Paine,
and Abraham Lincoln. And you are not doing me any good either.
Q Is it true that you use men who have great wealth?
A As I have already told you, poverty is always my friend because it
discourages independence of thought and encourages fear in the minds of
men. Some wealthy men serve my cause while others do me great damage,
depending upon how the wealth is used. The great Rockefeller fortune, for
example, is one of my worst enemies.
Q That is interesting, Your Majesty; will you tell me why you fear the
Rockefeller fortune more than others?
A The Rockefeller money is being used to isolate and conquer diseases of
the physical body, in all parts of the world. Disease has always been one of
my most effective weapons. The fear of ill health is second only to the fear of
poverty. The Rockefeller money is uncovering new secrets of nature in a
hundred different directions, all of which are designed to help men take and
keep possession of their own minds. It is encouraging new and better methods
of feeding, clothing, and housing people. It is wiping out the slums in the
large cities, the places where my favorite allies are found It is financing
campaigns for better government and helping to wipe out dishonesty in
politics. It is helping to set higher standards in business practice and
encouraging business men to conduct business by the Golden Rule; and that is
not doing my cause any good.
Q What about these boys and girls who are said to be on the road to hell?
Are you in control of them?
A Well, I can answer that question only with "yes and no." I have
corrupted the minds of the young by teaching them to drink and smoke, but
they have me baffled through their tendency to think for themselves.
Q You say you have corrupted the minds of the young people with liquor
and cigarettes. I can understand how liquor might destroy the power of
independent thought but do not see what cigarettes have to do with helping
your cause.




A You may not know it, but cigarettes break down the power of
persistence; they destroy the power of endurance; they destroy the ability to
concentrate; they deaden and undermine the imaginative faculty, and help in
other ways to keep people from using their minds most effectively.
Do you know I have millions of people, young and old, of both sexes, who
smoke two packages of cigarettes a day? That means I have millions of people
who are gradually destroying their power of resistance.
One day I shall add to their habit of cigarette smoking other thoughtdestroying habits, until I shall have gained control of their minds.
Habits come in pairs, triplets, and quadruplets. Any habit which weakens
one's will power invites a flock of its relatives to move in and take possession
of the mind. The cigarette habit not only lowers the power of resistance and
discourages persistence, but it invites looseness in other human relationships.
Q I never thought that cigarettes were a tool of destruction, Your
Majesty, but your explanation throws a different light on the subject. How
many converts to the habit do you now claim?
A I am proud of my record. Millions are now victims, and the number is
increasing daily. Soon I shall have most of the world indulging in the habit. In
thousands of families I now have followers of the habit, including every
member of the family. Very young boys and girls are beginning to take up the
habit. They are learning how to smoke by observing their parents and older
brothers and sisters.
Q Which do you consider to be your greater tool for gaining control of
human minds— cigarettes or liquor?
A Without hesitation I would say cigarettes. Once I get a young person to
join my two-package-a-day club, I have no trouble in inducing that person to
take on the habit of liquor, over-indulgence of sex, and all other related
habits which destroy independence of thought and action. Q Your Majesty,
when I began this interview I had you all wrong. I thought you were a fraud
and a fake, but I see now that you are quite real and very powerful.
A Your apology is accepted, but you need not have bothered. Millions of
people have questioned my power, and I got most of them at the gate as they
came over.




I ask no person to believe in me. I prefer that people fear me. I am no
beggar! I take what I want by cleverness and force. Begging people to believe
is the business of my opposition— not mine.
Q Your Majesty will please pardon my rudeness, but I would not be able
to look myself in the face again if I did not tell you, here and now, that you
are the damnedest fiend ever to be turned loose on innocent people.
I always had the wrong conception of you. I thought you were kind
enough to let people alone while they were living, that you merely tortured
their souls after death. Now I learn, from your own brazen confession, that
you destroy their right to freedom of thought and cause them to go through a
living hell on earth. What do you have to say to that?
A I get what I want by exercising self-control. It is not so good for my
own business, but I suggest you emulate me instead of criticizing me. You call
yourself a thinker, and you are. Otherwise you would never have forced this
interview on me. But you will never be the sort of thinker that frightens me
unless you gain and exercise greater control over your own emotions.
Q Let us get away from personalities. I came here to learn more about
you, not to discuss myself. Please go ahead and tell me of the many tricks you
have devised for gaining control of the human mind. What is your most
powerful weapon just now?
A That is a difficult question to answer. I have so many devices for
entering human minds and controlling them that it is difficult to say which
are the most powerful. Right at the moment I am trying to bring about
another world war. My friends here in Washington are helping me to involve
America in the war. If I can start the world to killing on a wholesale basis, I
shall be able to put into operation my favorite device for mind control. It is
what you may call mass fear. I used this device to bring about the other
World War in .  used it to bring about the economic depression in ,
and if my opposition had not double-crossed me I would now be in possession
of every man, woman, and child in the world. You can see for yourself how
near I came to world domination— the thing I have been struggling to attain
for thousands of years.
Q Yes, I see your point. Who wouldn't? You are a very ingenious
manipulator of the minds of people. Is your devilish business carried on only
through people of high position and great influence?



A Oh, no! I use the minds of people in all walks of life. As a matter of
fact, I prefer the type of person who makes no pretense of thinking; I can
manipulate that sort of person without difficulty. I could not control 
percent of the people of the world if all people were skilled in thinking for
themselves.
Q I am interested in the welfare of those people whom you claim to
control. Therefore, I wish you to tell me all of the tricks by which you enter
and control their minds. I want a complete confession from you, so begin with
your cleverest trick.
A This is suicide you are forcing on me, but I am helpless! So settle down
and I will place in your hands the weapon by which millions of your fellowearthbound will defend themselves against me.




Chapter  Drifting with the Devil
Q Tell me first about your most clever trick — the one you use to ensnare
the greatest number of people.
A If you force me to give away this secret, it will mean my loss of
millions of people now living and still greater numbers of millions as yet
unborn. I beg of you, permit me to pass this one question unanswered.
Q So His Majesty the Devil fears a mere humble earthbound creature! Is
that right?
A It is not right, but it is true. You have no right to rob me of my most
necessary tool of trade. For millions of years I have dominated earthbound
creatures through fear and ignorance. Now you come along and would destroy
my use of these weapons by forcing me to tell how I use them. Do you not
realize that you will break my grip on every person who heeds this confession
you are forcing from me? Have you no mercy? Have you no sense of humor?
Have you no sportsmanship?
Q Stop stalling, and start confessing. Who are you to ask mercy of one
whom you would destroy if you could? Who are you to talk of sportsmanship
and a sense of humor? You, who by your own confession have set up a living
hell on earth, where you punish innocent people through their fears and
ignorance. As for minding my own business, that is just what I am doing when
I force you to tell how you control people through their own minds. My
business, if it can be called a business, is helping to unlock the doors of the
self-made prisons in which men and women are confined because of the fears
you have planted in their minds.
A My greatest weapon over human beings consists of two secret
principles by which I gain control of their minds. I will speak first of the
principle of habit, through which I silently enter the minds of people. By
operating through this principle, I establish (I wish I could avoid using this
word) the habit of drifting. When a person begins to drift on any subject, he
is headed straight toward the gates of what you earthbound call hell.
Q Describe all the ways in which you induce people to drift. Define the
word and tell us exactly what you mean by it.




A I can best define the word "drift" by saying that people who think for
themselves never drift, while those who do little or no thinking for
themselves are drifters. A drifter is one who permits himself to be influenced
and controlled by circumstances outside of his own mind. He would rather let
me occupy his mind and do his thinking than go to the trouble of thinking for
himself. A drifter is one who accepts whatever life throws in his way without
making a protest or putting up a fight. He doesn't know what he wants from
life and spends all of his time getting just that. A drifter has lots of opinions,
but they are not his own. Most of them are supplied by me.
A drifter is one who is too lazy mentally to use his own brain. That is the
reason I can take control of people's thinking and plant my own ideas in their
minds.
Q I think I understand what a drifter is. Tell me the exact habits of
people by which you induce them to drift through life. Start by telling me
when and how you first gain control of a person's mind.
A My control over the mind of a human being is obtained while the
person is young. Sometimes I lay the foundation for my control of a mind
before the owner of it is born, by manipulating the minds of that person's
parents. Sometimes I go further back than this and prepare people for my
control through what you earthbound call "physical heredity." You see,
therefore, I have two approaches to the mind of a person.
Q Yes. Go on and describe these two doors by which you enter and
control the minds of human beings.
A As I have stated, I help to bring people into your world with weak
brains by giving to them, before birth, as many as possible of the weaknesses
of their ancestors. You call this principle "physical heredity." After people are
born I make use of what you earthbound call "environment" as a means of
controlling them. This is where the principle of habit enters. The mind is
nothing more than the sum total of one's habits! One by one I enter the mind
and establish habits, which lead finally to my absolute domination of the
mind
Q Tell me of the most common habits by which you control the minds of
people.
A That is one of my cleverest tricks I enter the minds of people through
thoughts which they believe to be their own. Those most useful to me are



fear, superstition, avarice, greed, lust, revenge, anger, vanity, and plain
laziness. Through one or more of these I can enter any mind, at any age, but I
get my best results when I take charge of a mind while it is young, before its
owner has learned how to close any of these nine doors. Then I can set up
habits which keep the doors ajar forever.
Q I am catching on to your methods. Now let us go back to the habit of
drifting. Tell us all about that habit since you say it is your cleverest trick in
controlling the minds of people.
A As I said before, I start people drifting during their youth. I induce
them to drift through school without knowing what occupation they wish to
follow in life. Here I catch the majority of people. Habits are related. Drift in
one direction and soon you will be drifting in all directions. I also use
environmental habits to give me a definite grip on my victims.
Q I see. You make it your business to train children in the habit of
drifting by inducing them to go through school without aim or purpose. Now
tell me of some of your other tricks with which you cause people to become
drifters.
A Well, my second best trick in developing the habit of drifting is one
that I put into operation with the aid of parents and public schoolteachers
and religious instructors.
I warn you not to force me to mention this trick. Do not disclose this
trick. If you do so, you will be hated by my co-workers who help me use this
trick. If you publish this confession in book form, your book will be barred
from the public schools. It will be blacklisted by most of the religious leaders.
It will be hidden from children by many parents. The newspapers will not
dare to give reviews of your book. Millions of people will hate you for writing
the book.
In fact, no one will like you or your book except those who think, and
you know how very few there are of this sort! My advice to you is to let me
skip the description of my second best trick. Q So for my own good you wish
to withhold the description of your second best trick. No one will like my
book except those who think, eh? Very well, go ahead and answer.
A You'll regret this, Mr. Earthbound, but the joke is on you. By this
mistake of yours you will divert attention from me to yourself. My co-workers,



of whom there are millions, will forget about me and hate you for uncovering
my methods.
Q Never mind about me. Tell me all about this second best trick of yours
with which you induce people to drift with you to hell.
A My second best trick is not second at all. It is first! It is first because
without it I never could gain control of the minds of the youths. Parents,
schoolteachers, religious instructors, and many other adults unknowingly
serve my purpose by helping me to destroy in children the habit of thinking
for themselves. They go about their work in various ways, never suspecting
what they are doing to the minds of children or the real cause of the
children's mistakes. Q I can hardly believe you, Your Majesty. I have always
believed that children's best friends were those closest to them, their
parents, their school teachers, and their religious instructors. Where would
children go for dependable guidance if not to those who have charge of them?
A That is where my cleverness comes in. There is the exact explanation
of how I control  percent of the people of the world. I take possession of
people during their youth, before they come into possession of their own
minds, by using those who are in charge of them. I especially need the help of
those who give children their religious instruction, because it is here that I
break down independent thought and start people on the habit of drifting, by
confusing their minds with unprovable ideas concerning a world of which they
know nothing. It is here also that I plant in the minds of children the greatest
of all fears— the fear of hell!
Q I understand that it is easy for you to frighten children with threats of
hell, but how do you continue to make them fear you and your hell after they
grow up and learn to think for themselves?
A Children grow up, but they do not always learn to think for
themselves! Once I capture the mind of a child, through fear, I weaken that
child's ability to reason and to think for himself, and that weakness goes with
the child all through life.
Q Is that not taking unfair advantage of a human being by contaminating
his mind before he comes into full possession ofit?
A Everything is fair that I can use to further my ends. I have no foolish
limitations of right and wrong. Might is right with me. I use every known
human weakness to gain and keep control of the human mind.



Q I understand your devilish nature! Now let us get back to further
discussion of your methods of inducing people to drift to hell here on earth.
From your confession I see that you take charge of children while their minds
are young and pliable. Tell me more of how you use parents, teachers, and
religious leaders to ensnare people into drifting.
A One of my favorite tricks is to coordinate the efforts of parents and
religious instructors so they work together in helping me to destroy the
children's power to think for themselves. I use many religious instructors to
undermine the courage and power of independent thought of children, by
teaching them to fear me; but I use parents to aid the religious leaders in this
great work of mine.
Q How do parents help religious leaders destroy their children's power to
think for themselves? I never heard of such a monstrosity!
A I accomplish this through a very clever trick. I cause the parents to
teach their children to believe as the parents do in connection with religion,
politics, marriage, and other important subjects. In this way, as you can see,
when I gain control of the mind of a person I can easily perpetuate the
control by causing that person to help me fasten it upon the minds of his
offspring.
Q In what other ways do you use parents to convert children into
drifters?
A I cause children to become drifters by following the example of their
parents, most of whom I have already taken over and bound eternally to my
cause. In some parts of the world I gain mastery over children's minds and
subdue their will power in exactly the same way that men break and subdue
animals of lower intelligence. It makes no difference to me how a child's will
is subdued, as long as it fears something. I will enter its mind through that
fear and limit the child's power to think independendy. Q It seems that you
go out of your way to keep people from thinking?
A Yes. Accurate thought is death to me. I cannot exist in the minds of
those who think accurately. I do not mind people thinking as long as they
think in terms of fear, discouragement, hopelessness, and destructiveness.
When they begin to think in constructive terms of faith, courage, hope, and
definiteness of purpose, they immediately become allies of my opposition and
are therefore lost to me.



Q I am beginning to understand how you gain control of the minds of
children through the help of their parents and religious instructors, but I do
not see how the schoolteachers help you in this damnable work.
A Schoolteachers help me gain control of the minds of children not so
much by what they teach the children as because of what they do not teach
them. The entire public school system is so administered that it helps my
cause by teaching children almost everything except how to use their own
minds and think independently. I live in fear that someday some courageous
person will reverse the present system of school teaching and deal my cause a
death blow by allowing the students to become the instructors, using those
who now serve as teachers only as guides to help the children establish ways
and means of developing their own minds from within. When that time
comes, the schoolteachers will no longer belong to my staff.
Q I was under the impression that the purpose of all schooling was to
help children to think.
A That may be the purpose of schooling, but the system in most of the
schools of the world does not carry out the purpose. School children are
taught not to develop and use their own minds, but to adopt and use the
thoughts of others. This sort of schooling destroys the capacity for
independent thought, except in a few rare cases where children rely so
definitely upon their own will power that they refuse to allow others to do
their thinking. Accurate thought is the business of my opposition, not mine!
Q What relationship, if any, has your opposition with the homes, the
churches, and the schools? Your reply to this question should be interesting.
A Here is where I make use of some more of my clever tricks. I cause it
to appear that everything done by the parents, the schoolteachers, and the
religious instructors is being done by my opposition.
This diverts attention from me while I manipulate the minds of the
young. When religious instructors try to teach children the virtues of my
opposition, they generally do so by frightening them with my name. That is
all I ask of them. I kindle the flame of fear into proportions which destroy the
child's power to think accurately. In the public schools the teachers further
my cause by keeping the children so busy cramming non-essential information
into their minds they have no opportunity to think accurately or to analyze
correcdy the things their instructors teach them.



Q Do you claim, for your cause, all those who are bound by the habit of
drifting?
A No. Drifting is only one of my tricks through which I take over the
power of independent thought. Before a drifter becomes my permanent
property, I must lead him on and ensnare him with another trick. I will tell
you about this other trick after I finish describing my methods of converting
people into drifters.
Q Do you mean you have a method by which you can cause people to
drift so far away from self-determination that they can never save
themselves?
A Yes, a definite method And it is so effective it never fails.
Q Do I understand you to claim your method is so powerful your
opposition cannot reclaim those whom you have permanently ensnared
through drifting?
A I claim just that! Do you think I would control so many people if my
opposition could prevent me? Nothing can stop me from controlling people
except people themselves.
Nothing can stop me except the power of accurate thought. People who
think accurately do not drift on any subject. They recognize the power of
their own minds. Moreover, they take over that power and yield it to no
person or influence.
Q Go ahead and tell me more of the methods by which you cause people
to drift to hell with you!
A I cause people to drift on every subject through which I can control
independent thought and action. Take the subject of health, for example. I
cause most people to eat too much food and the wrong sort of food. This
leads to indigestion and destroys the power of accurate thought. If the public
schools and the churches taught children more about proper eating, they
would do my cause irreparable damage.
Marriage I cause men and women to drift into marriage without plan or
purpose designed to convert the relationship into harmony. Here is one of my
most effective methods of converting people into the habit of drifting. I cause
married people to bicker and nag one another over money matters. I cause
them to quarrel over the bringing up of their children. I engage them in



unpleasant controversies over their intimate relationships and in
disagreements over friends and social activities. I keep them so busy finding
fault with one another that they never have time to do anything else long
enough to break the habit of drifting.
Occupation I teach people to become drifters by causing them to drift
out of school into the first job they can find, with no definite aim or purpose
except to make a living. Through this trick I keep millions of people in fear of
poverty all their lives. Through this fear I lead them slowly but surely onward
until they reach the point beyond which no individual ever has broken the
drifting habit.
Savings I cause people to spend freely and to save sparingly or not at
all, until I take complete control of them through their fear of poverty.
Environment I cause people to drift into inharmonious and unpleasant
environments in the home, in their places of occupation, in their relationship
with relatives and acquaintances, and to remain there until I claim them
through the habit of drifting.
Dominating Thoughts I cause people to drift into the habit of thinking
negative thoughts. This leads to negative acts and involves people in
controversies and fills their minds with fears, thus paving the way for me to
enter and control their minds. When I move in, I do so by appealing to people
through negative thoughts which they believe to be their own. I plant the
seeds of negative thought in the minds of people through the pulpit, the
newspapers, the moving pictures, the radio, and all other popular methods of
appeal to the mind. I cause people to allow me to do their thinking for them
because they are too lazy and too indifferent to think for themselves.
Q I conclude from what you say that drifting and procrastination are the
same. Is that true?
A Yes, that is correct. Any habit which causes one to procrastinate—to
put off reaching a definite decision— leads to the habit of drifting.
Q Is man the only creature who drifts?
A Yes. All other creatures move in response to definite laws of nature.
Man alone defies nature's laws and drifts when he wills.
Everything outside the minds of men is controlled by my opposition,
bylaws so definite that drifting is impossible. I control the minds of men



solely because of their habit of drifting, which is only another way of saying
that I control the minds of men only because they neglect or refuse to control
and use their own minds.
Q This is getting to be pretty deep stuff for a mere human being. Let us
get back to the discussion of something less abstract. Please tell me how this
drifting habit affects people in the everyday walks of life and tell me in terms
the average person can understand.
A I would prefer to keep this interview up among the stars!
Q No doubt you would. That would save you from being exposed. But let
us come back to earth. Tell me now what drifting is doing to us as a nation
here in the United States.
A Frankly, I may as well tell you that I hate the United States as only the
Devil can hate.
Q That is interesting. What is the cause of this hatred?
A The cause was born on July , , when fifty-six men signed a
document which destroyed my chances of controlling the nation. You know
that document as the Declaration of Independence. Had it not been for the
influence of that damnable document, I would now have a dictator running
the country and I would stop this right to free speech and independent
thought that is threatening my rule on earth.
Q Am I to understand from what you say that nations controlled by selfappointed dictators belong in your camp?
A There are no self-appointed dictators. I appoint them all. Moreover, I
manipulate them and direct them in their work. Nations run by my dictators
know what they want and take it by force. Look what I have done through
Mussolini in Italy! Look what I am doing through Hitler in Germany. Look what
I am doing through Stalin in Russia. My dictators run those nations for me
because the people have been subdued through the habit of drifting. My
dictators do no drifting. That is why they rule for me the millions of people
under their control.
Q What would happen if Mussolini, Stalin, and Hitler turned traitors and
disavowed you and your rule?




A That will not happen because I have them too well bribed. I am paying
each of them with the sop of his own vanity, by making him believe he is
acting on his own account. That is another trick of mine.
Q Let us come back to the United States and learn something of what
you are doing to convert people into the habit of drifting.
A Right now I am paving the way for a dictatorship by sowing the seeds
of fear and uncertainty in the minds of the people.
Q Through whom are you carrying on your work?
A Mainly through the President. I am destroying his influence with the
people by causing him to drift on the question of a working agreement
between employers and their employees. If I can induce him to drift for
another year, he will be so thoroughly discredited I can hand over the country
to a dictator. If the President continues to drift, I will paralyze personal
freedom in the United States just as I destroyed it in Spain, Italy, Germany,
and England.
Q What you say leads me to the conclusion that drifting is a weakness
which inevitably ends in failure, whether among individuals or nations. Is that
your claim?
A Drifting is the most common cause of failure in every walk of life. I can
control anyone whom I can induce to form the habit of drifting on any
subject. The reason for this is twofold. First, the drifter is just so much putty
in my hands, to be molded into whatever pattern I choose, because drifting
destroys the power of individual initiative. Second, the drifter cannot get
help from my opposition, because the opposition is not attracted to anything
so soft and useless.
Q Is that why a few people are wealthy while the majority of people are
poor?
A That is exactly the reason. Poverty, like physical illness, is a
contagious disease. You find it always among the drifters, never among those
who know what they want and are determined to get just that! It may mean
something to you when I call your attention to the fact that the non-drifters,
whom I do not control, and those who possess most of the wealth of the
world, happen to be the same people.




Q I have always understood that money was the root of all evil, that the
poor and the meek would inherit heaven, while the wealthy would pass into
your hands. What have you to say of that claim?
A Men who know how to get the material things of life generally know
how to keep out of the hands of the Devil as well. The ability to acquire
things is contagious. Drifters acquire nothing except that which no one else
wants. If more people had definite aims and stronger desires for material and
spiritual riches, I would have fewer victims.
Q I assume, from what you say, that you do not claim fellowship with the
industrial leaders. Evidently they are not friends of yours.
A Friends of mine? I'll tell you what sort of friends of mine they are. They
have belted the entire country with good roads, thus bringing into close
communion the people of both city and country. They have converted ores
into steel, with which they have built the skeletons of great skyscrapers. They
have harnessed electrical power and converted it into a thousand uses, all
designed to give man time to think. They have provided through the
automobile personal transportation to the humblest citizen, thus giving to
everyone the freedom of travel. They have provided every home with
instantaneous news of what is happening in all parts of the world through the
aid of the radio.
They have reared libraries in every city, town, and hamlet and have
filled them with books giving to all who read a complete outline of the most
useful knowledge mankind has gathered from his experiences. They have
given the humblest citizen the right to express his own opinion on any
subject, anytime, anywhere, without fear of molestation, and they have seen
to it that every citizen may help make his own laws, levy his own taxes, and
manage his own country through the ballot. These are but some of the things
the industrial leaders have done to give every citizen the privilege of
becoming a non-drifter. Do you think these men have helped my cause?
Q Who are some of the present-day non-drifters over whom you have no
control?
A I have control over no non-drifter, present or past. I control the weak,
not those who think for themselves.
Q Go ahead and describe a typical drifter. Give your description point by
point so I can recognize a drifter when I see him.



A The first thing you will notice about a drifter is his total lack of a
major purpose in life.
He will be conspicuous by his lack of self-confidence.
He will never accomplish anything requiring thought and effort.
He spends all he earns and more too, if he can get credit.
He will be sick or ailing from some real or imaginary cause, and calling to
high heaven if he suffers the least physical pain.
He will have little or no imagination.
He will lack enthusiasm and initiative to begin anything he is not forced
to undertake, and he will plainly express his weakness by taking the line of
least resistance whenever he can do so.
He will be ill-tempered and lacking in control over his emotions.
His personality will be without magnetism and it will not attract other
people.
He will have opinions on everything but accurate knowledge of nothing.
He may be jack of all trades but good at none.
He will neglect to cooperate with those around him, even those on whom
he must depend for food and shelter.
He will make the same mistake over and over again, never profiting by
failure.
He will be narrow-minded and intolerant on all subjects, ready to crucify
those who may disagree with him.
He will expect everything of others but be willing to give little or nothing
in return.
He may begin many things but he will complete nothing.
He will be loud in his condemnation of his government, but he will never
tell you definitely how it can be improved.




He will never reach decisions on anything if he can avoid it, and if he is
forced to decide he will reverse himself at the first opportunity.
He will eat too much and exercise too little.
He will take a drink of liquor if someone else will pay for it.
He will gamble if he can do it "on the cuff."
He will criticize others who are succeeding in their chosen calling.
In brief, the drifter will work harder to get out of thinking than most
others work in earning a good living.
He will tell a lie rather than admit his ignorance on any subject.
If he works for others, he will criticize them to their backs and flatter
them to their faces.
Q You have given me a graphic description of the drifter. Please now
describe the non-drifter so that I may recognize him on sight.
A The first sign of a non-drifter is this He is always engaged in doing
something definite, through some well-organized plan which is definite. He
has a major goal in life toward which he is always working, and many minor
goals, all of which lead toward his central scheme.
The tone of his voice, the quickness of his step, the sparkle in his eyes,
the quickness of his decisions clearly mark him as a person who knows exactly
what he wants and is determined to get it, no matter how long it may take or
what price he must pay.
If you ask him questions, he gives you direct answers and never falls back
on evasions or resorts to subterfuge.
He extends many favors to others, but accepts favors sparingly or not at
all.
He will be found up front whether he is playing a game or fighting a war.
If he does not know the answers he will say so frankly.
He has a good memory; never offers an alibi for his shortcomings.




He never blames others for his mistakes no matter if they deserve the
blame.
He used to be known as a go-getter, but in modern times he is called a
go-giver. You will find him running the biggest business in town, living on the
best street, driving the best automobile, and making his presence felt
wherever he happens to be.
He is an inspiration to all who come into contact with his mind.
The major distinguishing feature of the non-drifter is this He has a mind
of his own and uses it for all purposes.
Q Is the non-drifter born with some mental, physical, or spiritual
advantage not available to the drifter?
A No. The major difference between the drifter and the non-drifter is
something equally available to both. It is simply the prerogative right of each
to use his own mind and think for himself.
Q What brief message would you send to the typical drifter if you wished
to cure him of this evil habit?
A I would admonish him to wake up and give !
Q Give what?
A Some form of service useful to as many people as possible.
Q So the non-drifter is supposed to give, is he?
A Yes, if he expects to get! And he must give before he gets!
Q Some people doubt that you exist.
A I wouldn't worry about that if I were you. Those who are ready to be
converted from the habit of drifting will recognize the authenticity of this
interview by its soundness of counsel. The others are not worth the trouble it
would take to convert them.
Q Why do you not try to stop me from publishing this confession I am
wringing from you?




A Because that would be the surest of all ways to guarantee you will
publish it. I have a better plan than trying to suppress publication of my
confession. I will urge you to go ahead with the publication, then sit back and
watch you suffer when some of my faithful drifters begin to make things hot
for you. I will not need to deny your story. My followers will do that for me—
see if they don't.




Chapter  The Confession Continues
Q If this confession of yours stopped right here your statement would be
sound, but fortunately for millions of your victims who will gain their release
because of your confession, this interview will continue until you have
supplied me with the weapon by which you will eventually be restrained from
domination of people through their fears and superstitions. Remember, Your
Majesty, your confession has just begun. After I wring from you a description
of the methods by which you control people, I will force you also to give the
formula by which your control can be broken at will.
It is true I shall not remain here long enough to defeat you, but the
published word I leave behind me will be deathless because it will consist of
truth! You fear the opposition of no individual because you know it will be
short, but you do fear truth. You fear truth and nothing else, for the reason it
is slowly but definitely giving human beings freedom from all manner of fear.
Without the weapon of fear you would be helpless and entirely unable to
control any human being! Is that true or false?
A I have no alternative but to admit that what you say is true.
Q Now that we understand each other, let us go ahead with your
confession. But before we continue, I may as well take time out to do a little
boasting on my own account, now that you have had your fling at it. I will
confine myself to one question, the answer to which will give me all the
satisfaction I want. Is it not true that you control only the minds of those who
have allowed the drifting habit to be fixed upon them?
A Yes, that is true. I have already admitted this truth in a dozen or more
different ways. Why do you tantalize me by repeating the question?
Q There is power in repetition. I am forcing you to repeat the highlights
of your confession in as many different ways as possible so your victims may
check this interview and determine its soundness by their own experiences
with you. That is one of my little tricks. Do you approve of my method?
A You couldn't be setting a trap for me for the purpose of doing some
more boasting, could you?
Q I am asking the questions and you are doing the answering! Go ahead
now and confess why you are powerless to stop me from forcing this



confession from you. I want your confession for aid and comfort to victims of
yours whom I intend to release from your control the moment they read your
confession.
A I am powerless to influence or control you because you have found the
secret approach to my kingdom. You know that I exist only in the minds of
people who have fears. You know that I control only the drifters who neglect
to use their own minds. You know that my hell is here on earth and not in the
world that comes after death. And you know also that drifters supply all the
fire I use in my hell. You know that I am a principle or form of energy which
expresses the negative side of matter and energy, and that I am not a person
with a forked tongue and a spiked tail You have become my master because
you have mastered all your fears. Lastly, you know that you can release all of
my earthbound victims whom you contact, and this definite knowledge is the
blow with which you will deal me the greatest damage.
I cannot control you because you have discovered your own mind and you
have taken charge of it. There now, Mr. Earthbound, that confession should
feed your vanity to the bursting point. Q That last dart was unnecessary.
Knowledge of the sort I have used to master you does not contaminate itself
with vulgar indulgence in vanity. Truth is the one, and only, thing in the
world that can stand ridicule. Now let us continue with your confession. What
is wrong with the principle of flattery? You use it, do you not?
A Do I use it? Man alive! Flattery is one of my most useful weapons. With
this deadly instrument I slay the big ones and the little ones.
Q Your admission interests me. Go ahead now and tell me how you make
use of flattery.
A I make use of it in so many ways it is difficult to know where to begin.
I warn you, before I answer in detail, that publishing my answers will bring
down an avalanche of ridicule on your head for bringing up the question.
Q I'll take the responsibility. Proceed.
A Well, I may as well here admit that you have stumbled onto the major
secret of how I convert people to the habit of drifting!
Q That is a startling admission. Go ahead with your confession, and stick
strictly to this subject of flattery. No more side remarks and no more




facetiousness for the present. Tell me all about your use of flattery in gaining
control over people.
A Flattery is a bait of incomparable value to all who wish to gain control
over others. It has powerful pulling qualities because it operates through two
of the most common human weaknesses vanity and egotism. There is a
certain amount of vanity and egotism in everyone. In some people these
qualities are so pronounced they literally serve as a rope by which one may
be bound. The best of all ropes is flattery.
Flattery is the chief bait through which men seduce women. Sometimes—
in fact, frequently— women use the same bait to gain control of men,
especially men who cannot be mastered through sex appeal. I teach its use to
both men and women. Flattery is the chief bait with which my agents weave
their way into the confidence of people from whom they procure information
needed to carry on warfare.
Wherever anyone stops to feed his vanity on flattery, I move in and begin
to build another drifter. Non-drifters are not easily flattered. I inspire people
to use flattery in every human relationship where its use is possible because
those who are influenced by it become easy victims of the drifting habit.
Q Can you control anyone who is amenable to flattery?
A Very easily. As I have already told you, flattery is of major importance
in alluring people into the habit of drifting.
Q At what age are people most susceptible to flattery?
A Age has nothing to do with one's susceptibility to flattery. People
respond to it, in one way or another, from the time they become conscious of
their own existence until they die.
Q Through what motive can women be most easily flattered?
A Their vanity. Tell a woman she is pretty or that she wears clothes well.
Q What motive is most effective in harpooning men?
A Egotism, with a capital E! Tell a man he has a strong Herculean body or
that he is a great business tycoon, and he will purr like a cat and smile like an
opossum! After that you know what happens.
Q Are all men like that?



A Oh, no. Two out of every hundred have their egotism so thoroughly
under control that even an expert flatterer couldn't get under their skins with
a double-edged butcher knife.
Q How does a cunning woman apply her art of flattery in attracting men?
A Great heavens, man, do I have to draw a picture of her method for
you? Have you no imagination?
Q Oh, yes, I have imagination enough, Your Majesty, but I am thinking of
the poor dupes of the world who need to understand the exact technique
with which they may be flattered into the habit of drifting. Go on and tell us
how a woman can harpoon rich and presumably smart men.
A This is a devilish trick to play on women, but since you demand the
information I am helpless to withhold it. Women influence men through a
technique consisting, first, of ability to inject soft, cooing baby tones into
their voices, and, second, by closing their eyes into a half-closed position
which registers hypnotism in connection with the flattery of men.
Q Is that all there is to the business of flattery?
A No, that is only the technique. Then comes the motive a woman uses
as a lure. The type of woman you perhaps have in mind never sells a man
herself or anything she can give him. Instead she sells him his own egotism!
Q Is that all that women use when they wish to flatter men?
A That is the most effective thing they use It works when sex appeal
fails!
Q So I am to believe that big, strong, smart men can be wound up and
manipulated through flattery, just as if they were so much putty? Is that
possible?
A Is it possible? It is happening every minute of the day. Moreover, unless
they are non-drifters, the bigger they come, the harder they fall when the
expert flatterer moves in on them.
Q Tell me of some of your other tricks with which you cause people to
drift in life.




A One of my most effective devices is failure! The majority of people
begin to drift as soon as they meet with opposition, and not one out of ten
thousand will keep on trying after failing two or three times.
Q So it is your business to induce people to fail whenever you can. Is that
correct?
A You have it right. Failure breaks down one's morale, destroys selfconfidence, subdues enthusiasm, dulls imagination, and drives away
definiteness of purpose.
Without these qualities no one can permanently succeed in any
undertaking. The world has produced thousands of inventors with ability
superior to that of the late Thomas A. Edison. But these men have never been
heard of, while the name of Edison will go marching on because Edison
converted failure into a stepping stone to achievement while the others used
it as an alibi for not producing results.
Q Is the capacity to surmount failure without being discouraged one of
Henry Ford's chief assets?
A Yes, and this same quality is the chief asset of every man who attains
outstanding success in any calling.
Q That statement covers lots of territory, Your Majesty. Do you not wish
to modify it or tone it down a bit for the sake of accuracy?
A No modification is necessary because the claim is none too broad.
Search accurately into the lives of men and women who achieve enduring
success and you will find, without exception, that their success has been in
exact proportion to the extent that they surmounted failure.
The life of every successful person loudly acclaims that which every true
philosopher knows "Every failure brings with it the seed of an equivalent
success."
But the seed will not germinate and grow under the influence of a
drifter. It springs to life only when it is in the hands of one who recognizes
that most failures are only temporary defeat, and who never, under any
circumstances, accepts defeat as an excuse for drifting.




Q If I understand you correctly, you claim there is virtue in failure. That
does not seem reasonable. Why do you try to induce people to fail if there is
virtue in failure?
A There is no inconsistency in my claims. The appearance of
inconsistency is due to your lack of understanding. Failure is a virtue only
when it does not lead one to quit trying and begin drifting. I induce as many
people as I can to fail as often as possible for the reason that not one out of
ten thousand will keep on trying after failing two or three times. I am not
concerned about the few who convert failures into stepping stones because
they belong to my opposition anyway. They are the non-drifters and therefore
they are beyond my reach.
Q Your explanation clears up the matter. Now go ahead and tell me of
some of your other tricks with which you allure people into drifting. A One
of my most effective tricks is known to you as propaganda. This is the
instrument of greatest value to me in setting people to murdering one
another under the guise of war.
The cleverness of this trick consists mainly of the subtlety with which I
use it.
I mix propaganda with the news of the world. I have it taught in public
and private schools. I see that it finds its way into the pulpit. I color moving
pictures with it I see that it enters every home where there is a radio. I inject
it into billboard, newspaper, and radio advertising. I spread it in every place
of business where people work. I use it to fill the divorce courts and I make it
serve to destroy business and industry.
It is my chief instrument for starting runs on banks. My propagandists
cover the world so thoroughly that I can start epidemics of disease, turn loose
the dogs of war, or throw business into a panic at will.
Q If you can do all that you claim with propaganda, it is little wonder
that we have wars and business depressions. Give me a simple description of
what you mean by the term "propaganda." Just what is it and how does it
work? I wish to know particularly how you cause people to drift through the
use of this devilish device.
A Propaganda is any device, plan, or method by which people can be
influenced without knowing that they are being influenced, or the source of
the influence.



Propaganda is used in business for the purpose of discouraging
competition. Employers use it to gain advantage over their employees. The
employees retaliate by using it to gain advantage over their employers. In
fact, it is used so universally and through such a smooth and beautiful
streamlined technique that it looks harmless even when it is detected.
Q I suppose some of your boys are now engaged in preparing the minds of
the American people to drift into some form of dictatorship. Tell me how
they work.
A Yes! Millions of my boys are preparing Americans to become Hitlerized
My best boys are working through politics and labor organization. We intend
to take over the country with ballots instead of bullets. Americans are so
sensitive they would never stand the shock of seeing their form of
government changed with the aid of machine guns and tank cars. So our
propaganda boys are serving them a diet they will swallow, by stirring up
strife between employers and employees and turning the government against
business and industry. When propaganda has done its work thoroughly, one of
my boys will move in as dictator and the Nine Old Men on your Supreme Court
with their silly notions of the Constitution will move out!
Everyone will be given a job or fed from the government treasury. When
men's bellies are filled, they drift freely with one who does the filling. Hungry
men get out from under control.
Q I have often wondered who invented the clever trick which you call
propaganda. From what you tell me of its source and nature I understand why
it is so deadly. Only one as clever as Your Majesty could have invented such a
device with which to dull the reason, dethrone the will, and lure men into
drifting.
Why do you not use your powerful propaganda to gain control of your
victims instead of subduing them through fear and annihilating them through
warfare?
A What is fear of the Devil except propaganda? You have not observed
my technique very carefully or you would have seen that I am the world's
greatest propagandist! I never attain an end by direct, open means which I
can achieve through subterfuge and subtlety. What do you suppose I am
using, when I plant negative ideas in the minds of men and gain control of
them through what they believe to be their own ideas? What would you call
that except the cleverest of all forms of propaganda?



Q Surely you are not going to tell me that you destroy people through
their own help without their realizing what you are doing?
A That is exactly what I wish you to understand. Moreover, I will show
you exactly how the trick is performed.
Q Now we are getting somewhere. Exactly how do you convert human
beings into propagandists and lure them into self-imprisonment? Give me the
story with all its lurid details. This is the most important part of your
confession and I am consumed with eagerness to gain control of your secret. I
can hardly blame you for stalling about answering my question because you
know so well that your answer will snatch millions of innocent victims from
your control. You also know that your answer will protect other countless
millions of yet unborn people from being victimized by you. It is little wonder
you are hedging about answering.
A Your deductions are correct. This part of my confession will do me
more damage than all the remainder of it.
Q Stating your headache in a better way, this part of your confession will
save more millions of people from your control than all the remainder of it.
A All I can say is that you have me in a hell of a situation!
Q Now you shall know how the millions of your victims feel. Let's have it.
A I make my first entry into an individual's mind by bribing him.
Q What do you use as a bribe?
A I use many things, all of them pleasant things the individual covets. I
use the same sort of bribes that individuals use when they bribe one another.
That is, I use for bribes the things people most want. My best bribes are
these Love The thirst for sex expression Covetousness for money The
obsessive desire to gain something for nothing— gambling Vanity in women,
egotism in men Desire to be the master of others • Desire for intoxicants and
narcotics Desire for self-expression through words and deeds Desire to
imitate others Desire for perpetuation of life after death Desire to be a hero
or heroine Desire for physical food
Q That is an imposing list of bribes, Your Majesty. Do you use others?




A Yes, plenty of them, but these are my favorites. Through some
combination of them I can enter the mind of any human being at will at any
age from birth until death.
Q You mean that these bribes are the keys with which you can silently
unlock the door to any mind you choose?
A That is exactly what I mean and I can do it too.
Q What happens when you enter the mind of a person who is not yet in
the habit of drifting, but belongs in the  percent class as a potential
drifter?
A I go to work immediately to occupy as much of that person's mind as I
can master. If the individual's greatest weakness is the desire for money, I
begin to dangle coins before him, figuratively speaking. I intensify his desire
and induce him to go after money. Then when he gets near it I snatch it away
from him.
This is an old trick of mine. After the trick has been repeated a few
times, the poor fellow gives in and quits. Then I take over a little more space
in his mind and fill it with the fear of poverty. That is one of my best mindfillers.
Q Yes, I admit your method is very clever, but what happens if the victim
fools you and gets his hands on a lot of money? You don't fill his mind with
fear of poverty then, do you?
A No, I don't. I take over the space by filling it with something which
serves my purpose just as well. If my victim converts his desire for money into
large sums, I start over-feeding him with the things he can buy with it. For
example, I cause him to stuff himself with rich foods. This slows down his
thinking capacity, endangers his heart, and starts him on the road to drifting.
Then I pester him with intestinal poisoning through the surplus food he
eats. That also slows down his thinking and gives him a nasty disposition.
Q What if the victim is not a glutton? What other follies can you induce
him to pick up that lead to drifting?
A If the victim is a male I can usually snare him through his sex appetite.
Over-indulgence in sex starts more men to drifting toward failure than all
other causes combined.



Q So food and sex are two of your sure-fire baits! Is that correct?
A Yes. With these two lures I can take over a majority of my victims, and
then there is the desire for money.
Q I am beginning to think that wealth is more dangerous than poverty, if
your story is to be believed.
A That altogether depends upon who has the wealth and how it was
acquired.
Q What has the manner in which money is acquired to do with its being a
blessing or a curse?
A Everything. If you don't believe me, take a look at those who acquire a
large amount of money quickly, without time to get wisdom along with it, and
observe how they use it.
Why, do you suppose, rich men's sons seldom equal the achievements of
their fathers? I'll tell you why. It is because they have been deprived of the
self-discipline which comes from being forced to work.
Look into the records of moving picture stars or athletes who suddenly
find themselves in possession of big money and hero worship and praise from
the public. Observe how quickly I move in and take them over in many cases,
mainly through sex, gambling, food, and liquor. With these I catch and
control the biggest and the best of people as soon as they get their hands on
big money.
Q What about those who acquire money slowly, by rendering some form
of useful service? Are they easily snared too?
A Oh, I get them all right, but I generally have to change my bait. Some
of them want one thing and others want something else.
Where my purpose is best served I see to it that they get what they want
most, but I manage to wrap in the package something they don't want. The
thing I give them is the definite thing that makes them drifters. Do you see
how I work?
Q And very clever work it is. You lure people on through their natural
desires, but you slip your deadly poison into the object of those desires
wherever you can.



A Now you are catching on. You see, I play both ends against the middle,
so to speak.
Q From all you say I infer that you cannot induce a nondrifter to help you
gain control of his mind by baiting him with your bribes. Is that correct?
A That is exactly correct. I can— and I do— interest nondrifters in my
bribes, because I use for the purpose of bribery the things all people naturally
desire, but the non-drifter resembles a fish that steals the bait from your
hook but refuses to take the hook.
The non-drifter takes from life whatever he wants, but he takes it on his
own terms. The drifter takes whatever he can get, but he takes what he gets
on my terms.
Stating the matter in another way, the non-drifter borrows money from a
legitimate banker, if he wants it, and pays a legitimate rate of interest. The
drifter goes to the pawn shop, hocks his watch, and pays a suicidal rate of
interest for his loan.
Q So I draw from your claims the conclusion that your hand is mixed up
somehow in all of people's troubles and miseries, even though your presence
may not be visible?
A My unwilling workers are often my best workers. You see, my unwilling
workers are those whom I cannot control with some combination of bribes,
people whom I have to master by fear or through some form of misfortune.
They do not wish to serve me, but they cannot avoid it because they are
eternally bound to me by the habit of drifting.
Q Now I am beginning to better understand your technique. You bribe
your victims through their natural desires and lead them astray while you
induce them to become drifters if they respond to your lure. If they refuse to
respond, you plant the seed of fear in their minds or trap them through some
form of misfortune, and hog-tie them while they are down. Is that your
method?
A That is exactly the way I work. Clever, don't you think?
Q Which do you prefer to serve as your propagandists— the young or the
old?




A The young, of course! They can be influenced by most bribes more
easily than people of mature judgment. Moreover, they have longer to remain
in my service.
Q Your Majesty has given me a clear description of drifting. Tell me what
must be done to insure against the habit of drifting. I want a complete
formula that anyone can use.
A Protection against drifting lies within easy reach of every human being
who has a normal body and a sound mind. The self-defense can be applied
through these simple methods
. Do your own thinking on all occasions. The fact that human beings are
given complete control over nothing save the power to think their own
thoughts is laden with significance.
. Decide definitely what you want from life; then create a plan for
attaining it and be willing to sacrifice everything else, if necessary, rather
than accept permanent defeat.
. Analyze temporary defeat, no matter of what nature or cause, and
extract from it the seed of an equivalent advantage.
. Be willing to render useful service equivalent to the value of all
material things you demand of life, and render the service first.
. Recognize that your brain is a receiving set that can be attuned to
receive communications from the universal storehouse of Infinite Intelligence,
to help you transmute your desires into their physical equivalent.
. Recognize that your greatest asset is time, the only thing except the
power of thought which you own outright, and the one thing which can be
shaped into whatever material things you want. Budget your time so none of
it is wasted.
. Recognize the truth that fear generally is a filler with which the Devil
occupies the unused portion of your mind. It is only a state of mind which you
can control by filling the space it occupies with faith in your ability to make
life provide you with whatever you demand of it.
. When you pray, do not beg! Demand what you want and insist upon
getting exactly that, with no substitutes.



. Recognize that life is a cruel taskmaster and that either you master it
or it masters you. There is no half-way or compromising point. Never accept
from life anything you do not want. If that which you do not want is
temporarily forced upon you, you can refuse, in your own mind, to accept it
and it will make way for the thing you do want.
. Lastly, remember that your dominating thoughts attract, through a
definite law of nature, by the shortest and most convenient route, their
physical counterpart. Be careful what your thoughts dwell upon.
Q That list looks imposing. Give me a simple formula, combining all the
ten points. If you had to combine all ten in one, what would it be?
A Be definite in everything you do and never leave unfinished thoughts in
the mind. Form the habit of reaching definite decisions on all subjects.
Q Can the habit of drifting be broken, or does it become permanent once
it has been formed?
A The habit can be broken if the victim has enough will power, providing
it is done in time. There is a point beyond which the habit can never be
broken. Beyond that point the victim is mine. He resembles a fly that has
been caught in a spider's web. He may struggle, but he cannot get out. Each
move he makes entangles him more securely. The web in which I entangle my
victims permanently is a law of nature not yet isolated by, or understood by,
men of science.




Chapter  Hypnotic Rhythm
Q What is this mysterious law through which you take permanent control
of people's bodies even before you take over their souls? The whole world will
want to know more about this law and how it operates.
A It will be hard to describe the law so you will understand it, but you
may call it "hypnotic rhythm." It is the same law through which people can be
hypnotized.
Q So you have the power to use the laws of nature as a web in which you
bind your victims in eternal control. Is that your claim?
A That is not only my claim. It is the truth! I take over their minds and
bodies even before they die whenever I can lure them or frighten them into
hypnotic rhythm.
Q What is hypnotic rhythm? How do you use it to gain permanent mastery
over human beings?
A I will have to go back into time and space and give you a brief
elementary description of how nature uses hypnotic rhythm. Otherwise you
will not be able to understand my description of how I use this universal law
to control human beings.
Q Go ahead, but keep your story confined to simple illustrations which
come within the range of my own experience and knowledge of natural laws.
A Very well, I shall do my best You, of course, know that nature
maintains a perfect balance between all the elements and all the energy in
the universe. You can see that the stars and the planets move with perfect
precision, each one keeping its own place in time and space. You can see that
the seasons of the year come and go with perfect regularity. You can see that
an oak tree grows from an acorn and a pine grows from the seed of its
ancestor. An acorn never produces a pine and a pine seed never produces an
oak.
These are simple things which anyone can understand; what one cannot
see is the universal law through which nature maintains perfect balance
throughout the myriad of universes.




You earthbound caught a fragmentary glimpse of this great universal law
when Newton discovered that it holds your earth in its position and causes all
material objects to be attracted toward the center of the earth. He called
the law gravitation.
But he did not go far enough in his study of the law. If he had, he would
have discovered that the same law which holds your earth in position and
helps nature to maintain a perfect balance over the four dimensions— in
which all matter and energy are contained— is the web in which I entangle
and control the minds of human beings.
Q Tell me more of this astounding law of hypnotic rhythm.
A As I have already stated, there is a universal form of energy with which
nature keeps a perfect balance between all matter and energy. She makes
specialized use of this universal building material by breaking it up into
different wavelengths. The breaking-up process is carried on through habit.
You will better understand what I am trying to convey if I compare it
with the method by which one learns to play music. At first the notes are
memorized in the mind. Then they are related to one another through melody
and rhythm By repetition the melody and rhythm become fixed in the mind.
Observe how relentlessly the musician must repeat a tune before he masters
it. Through repetition the musical notes blend and then you have music.
Any impulse of thought that the mind repeats over and over through
habit forms an organized rhythm. Undesirable habits can be broken. They
must be broken before they assume the proportions of rhythm. Are you
following me?
Q Yes.
A Well, to continue, rhythm is the last stage of habit! Any thought or
physical movement which is repeated over and over through the principle of
habit finally reaches the proportion of rhythm.
Then the habit cannot be broken because nature takes it over and makes
it permanent. It is something like a whirlpool in water. An object may keep
floating indefinitely unless it is caught in a whirlpool. Then it is carried round
and round but it cannot escape. The energy with which people think may be
compared with water in a river.




Q So this is the way in which you take control of the minds of people, is
it?
A Yes. All I have to do to gain control over any mind is to induce its
owner to drift
Q Am I to understand that the habit of drifting is the major danger
through which people lose their prerogative or privilege of thinking their own
thoughts and shaping their own earthly destinations?
A That and much more. Drifting is also the habit through which I take
over their souls after they give up their physical bodies.
Q Then the only way a human being can be saved from eternal
annihilation is by maintaining control over his own mind while he is on this
earth. Is that true?
A You have stated the truth perfectly! Those who control and use their
own minds escape my web. I get all the others as naturally as the sun sets in
the west.
Q Is that all there is to the business of being saved from eternal
annihilation? Doesn't what you call your opposition have anything to do with
saving people?
A I can see that you do think very deeply. My opposition— the power you
earthbound call God— has everything to do with the salvation of people from
eternal annihilation, and for that reason it is my opposition who provides
every human being with the privilege of using his own mind.
If you use that power by maintaining control over your own mind, you
become a part of it when you give up your physical body. If you neglect to use
it, then I have the privilege of taking advantage of the neglect through the
law of hypnotic rhythm.
Q How much of a person do you take over when you gain control of him?
A Everything that is left after he ceases to control and use his own mind.
Q In other words, when you gain control of a person you take over all
there is of his individuality up to the time that he quits using his own mind? Is
that correct?
A That is how I operate.



Q What do you do with people whom you control before death? Of what
good are they to you while they live?
A I use them, or what is left of than after I take charge, as propagandists
to help me prepare the minds of others to drift
Q You not only fool people into destroying their power to control their
own minds, but you use them to help you trap others?
A Yes, I let no opportunity get away from me.
Q Let us come back to the subject of hypnotic rhythm. Tell me more of
how this law works. Show me how you use individuals to help you gain control
over others. I want to know something of the most effective way you use
hypnotic rhythm.
A Oh, that is easy! The thing I like best is to fill the minds of people with
fear. Once I fill one's mind with fear I have little trouble causing him to drift
until I have entangled him in the web of hypnotic rhythm.
Q What human fear best serves your purpose?
A The fear of death.
Q Why is the fear of death your favorite weapon?
A Because no one knows, and by the very nature of the laws of the
universe, no one can prove definitely what happens after death. This
uncertainty frightens people out of their wits.
People who give over their minds to fear— any sort of fear neglect to use
their minds and begin to drift. Eventually they drift into the whirlpool of
hypnotic rhythm from which they may never escape.
Q Then you do not mind what religious leaders think or say of you when
they speak of death?
A Not as long as they say something! If the churches should stop talking
about me, my cause would receive a severe setback. Every attack made
against me fixes the fear of me in the minds of all who are influenced by it.
You see, opposition is the thing that keeps some people from drifting!
Providing they do not yield to it.




Q Since you claim the churches help instead of hindering your cause, tell
me what would give you cause to worry?
A My only worry is that someday a real thinker may appear on earth.
Q What would happen if a thinker did appear?
A You ask me what would happen? I'll tell you what would happen.
People would learn the greatest of all truths— that the time they spend in
fearing something would, if reversed, give them all they want in the material
world and save them from me after death. Isn't that worth thinking about?
Q What is keeping such a thinker from appearing in the world?
A Fear of criticism! It may interest you to know that the fear of criticism
is the only effective weapon I have with which to whip you. If you were not
afraid to publish this confession after you wring it from me, I would lose my
earthly kingdom.
Q And if I did surprise you and publish it, how long would it be until you
lost your kingdom?
A Just long enough for one generation of children to grow into
understanding. You cannot take the adults from me. I have them too securely
sewed up. But if you published this confession, it would be sufficient to keep
me from gaining control of the yet unborn and those who have not yet
reached the age of reason. You wouldn't dare publish what I have told you
about the religious leaders. They would crucify you!
Q I thought the savage practice of crucifixion went out of style two
thousand years ago.
A I don't mean crucifixion on a cross. I mean social and financial
crucifixion. Your income would be shut off. You would become a social
outcast. Religious leaders and their followers alike would treat you with
scorn.
Q Suppose I should choose to throw in my lot with the select few who
make a pretence of using their own minds rather than fear the masses who do
not— the masses of whom you claim  percent?
A If you have courage enough to do this, you will crimp my style.
Q Why do you lay claim to no scientist? Don't you like scientists?



A Oh yes, I like all people well enough, but true scientists are out of my
reach.
Q Why?
A Because they think for themselves and spend their time studying
natural laws. They deal with cause and effect. They deal with facts wherever
they find them. But do not make the mistake of believing scientists have no
religion. They have a very definite religion.
Q What is their religion?
A The religion of truth! The religion of natural law! If the world ever
produces an accurate thinker with ability to fathom the deeply buried secret
of life and death, you can be sure that science will be responsible for the
catastrophe.
Q Catastrophe to whom?
A To me, of course!
Q Let's get back to the subject of hypnotic rhythm. I want to know more
about it. Is it something like the principle through which people can
hypnotize one another?
A It is precisely the same thing. I have already told you so. Why do you
repeat your questions?
Q That is an old worldly custom of mine, Your Majesty. For your
enlightenment I will tell you I am forcing you to repeat many of your
statements for the sake of emphasis. I am also trying to see if I can catch you
in a lie! Don't dodge the issue. Get back to hypnotic rhythm and tell me all
you know about it. Am I a victim of it?
A Not now, but you barely missed falling into my web. You drifted
toward the whirlpool of hypnotic rhythm, until you discovered how to force
me into making this confession. Then I lost control of you!
Q How interesting. You are not trying to recapture me through flattery,
are you?
A That would be the best bribe I could offer you. It is the bribe I used on
you effectively before you got the upper hand of me.



Q With what did you flatter me?
A With many things, chief among them sex and the desire for selfexpression.
Q What effect did your bribes have on me?
A They caused you to neglect your major purpose in life and started you
to drifting.
Q Was that all you did to me through your bribes?
A That was plenty.
Q But I am back on the track and out of your reach now, am I not?
A Yes, you are temporarily out of my reach because you are not drifting.
Q What broke your spell over me and released me from the habit of
drifting?
A My answer may humiliate you. Do you want to hear it?
Q Go ahead and give it to me, Your Majesty. I wish to learn how much
truth I can stand.
A When you found a great love in the woman of your choice, I lost my
grip on you.
Q So you are going to accuse me of hiding behind a woman's skirts, are
you?
A No, not hiding. I wouldn't put it that way. I would say you have learned
how to give yourself a solid background with the embellishment of a woman's
mind.
Q The woman's skirt has nothing to do with it then?
A No, but her brain does. When you and your wife began to combine your
two brains, through your habit of "Master Minding" every day, you stumbled
upon the secret power with which you forced me into this confession.
Q Is that the truth, or are you trying to flatter me again?




A I could flatter you if I had you alone, but I cannot flatter you while you
have the use of your wife's mind.
Q I am beginning to catch on to something important. I am beginning to
understand what was meant by the writer of that passage in the Bible which
says substantially, "When two or more meet together and ask for anything in
My name, it shall be granted." It is true, then, that two minds are better than
one.
A It is not only true, it is necessary before anyone can continuously
contact the great storehouse of Infinite Intelligence wherein is stored all that
is, all that ever was, and all that can ever be.
Q Is there such a storehouse?
A If there had not been, you would not— could not— now be humiliating
me with this silly forced confession.
Q Isn't it dangerous to give this sort of information to the world?
A Sure, it is dangerous to me. If I were you, I would not give it out.
Q Let us get back, now, to the technique through which you fasten on
your victims the habit of drifting. What is the very first step a drifter must
take to break the habit?
A A burning desire to break it! You of course know that no one can be
hypnotized by another person without his willingness to be hypnotized. The
willingness may assume the form of indifference toward life generally, lack of
ambition, fear, lack of definiteness of purpose, and many other forms. Nature
does not need one's consent in order to place him under the spell of hypnotic
rhythm. It needs only to find him off guard, through any form of neglect to
use his own mind. Remember this whatever you have, you use it or you lose
it!
All successful attempts to break the habit of drifting must be done
before nature makes the habit permanent, through hypnotic rhythm.
Q As I understand you, hypnotic rhythm is a natural law through which
nature fixes the vibration of all environments. Is that true?
A Yes, nature uses hypnotic rhythm to make one's dominating thoughts
and one's thought-habits permanent. That is why poverty is disease. Nature



makes it so by fixing permanently the thought-habits of all who accept
poverty as an unavoidable circumstance.
Through this same law of hypnotic rhythm, nature will also fix
permanently positive thoughts of opulence and prosperity.
Perhaps you will better understand the working principle of hypnotic
rhythm if I tell you its nature is to fix permanently all habits whether they are
mental or physical. If your mind fears poverty, your mind will attract poverty.
If your mind demands opulence and expects it, your mind will attract the
physical and financial equivalents of opulence. This is in accordance with an
immutable law of nature.
Q Did the writer of that sentence in the Bible, "Whatsoever a man
soweth, that shall he also reap," have in mind this law of nature?
A He could have nothing else in mind. The statement is true. You can see
evidence of its truth in all human relationships.
Q And that is why the man who forms the habit of drifting through life
must accept whatever life hands him. Is that correct?
A That is absolutely correct. Life pays the drifter its own price, on its
own terms. The non-drifter makes life pay on his own terms.
Q Doesn't the question of morals enter into what one gets from life?
A To be sure, but only for the reason that one's morals have an influence
on one's thoughts. No one can collect what he wants from life merely by
being good, if that is what you want to know.
Q No, I guess not. I see what you mean. We are all where we are and
what we are because of our own deeds.
A No, not exactly. You are where you are and what you are because of
your thoughts and your deeds.
Q Then there is no such reality as luck, is there?
A Emphatically no. Circumstances which people do not understand are
classified under the heading of luck. Back of every reality is a cause. Often
the cause is so far removed from the effect that the circumstance can be
explained only by attributing it to the operation of luck. Nature knows no
such law as luck. It is a man-made hypothesis with which he explains away



things he does not understand. The terms "luck" and "miracle" are twin
sisters. Neither of them has any real existence except in the imaginations of
people. Both are used to explain that which people do not understand.
Remember this everything having a real existence is capable of proof. Keep
this one truth in mind and you will become a sounder thinker.
Q Which is more important, one's thoughts or one's deeds?
A All deeds follow thoughts. There can be no deeds without their having
first been patterned in thought. Moreover, all thoughts have a tendency to
clothe themselves in their physical counterpart. One's dominating thoughts,
that is, the thoughts one mixes with the emotions, desire, hope, faith, fear,
hate, greed, enthusiasm, not only have a tendency to clothe themselves in
their physical equivalent, but they are bound to do so.
Q That reminds me to ask you to tell me more about yourself. Where, in
addition to the minds of people, do you dwell and operate?
A I operate wherever there is something I can control and appropriate. I
have already told you I am the negative portion of the electron of matter.
• I am the explosion in lightning.
• I am the pain in disease and physical suffering.
• I am the unseen general in warfare.
• I am the unknown commissioner of poverty and famine.
• I am the executioner extraordinaire at death.
• I am the inspirer of lust after the flesh.
• I am the creator of jealousy and envy and greed.
• I am the instigator of fear.
• I am the genius who converts the achievements of men of science into
instruments of death.
• I am the destroyer of harmony in all manner of human relationships.
• I am the antithesis of justice.
• I am the driving force in all immorality.



• I am the stalemate of all good.
• I am anxiety, suspense, superstition, and insanity.
• I am the destroyer of hope and faith.
• I am the inspirer of destructive gossip and scandal.
• I am the discourager of free and independent thought.
• In brief, I am the creator of all forms of human misery, the instigator
of discouragement and disappointment.
Q And you do not call that cold and cruel?
A I call that definite and dependable.
The world depression broke up the habits of men everywhere and
redistributed the sources of opportunity in all walks of life on an
unprecedented scale.
The drifter's pet alibi, with which he tries to explain away his
undesirable position, is his cry that the world has run dry of opportunities.
Non-drifters do not wait for opportunity to be placed in their way. They
create opportunity to fit their desires and demands of life!
Q Are non-drifters smart enough to avoid the influence of hypnotic
rhythm?
A No one is smart enough to dodge the influence of hypnotic rhythm.
One could just as easily avoid the influence of the law of gravity. The law of
hypnotic rhythm fixes permanently the dominating thoughts of men, whether
they be drifters or non-drifters.
There is no reason why a non-drifter would want to avoid the influence
of hypnotic rhythm, because that law is favorable to him. It helps him convert
his dominating aims, plans, and purposes into their physical replicas. It fixes
his habits of thought and makes them permanent.
Only the drifter would wish to dodge the influence of hypnotic rhythm.
Q For the better portion of my adult life I have been a drifter. How did I
manage to escape being swept into the whirlpool of hypnotic rhythm?



A You haven't escaped. The major portion of your dominating thoughts
and desires, since you reached adulthood, has been a well-defined, definite
desire to understand all the potentialities of the mind.
You may have drifted on thoughts of lesser importance, but you did not
drift in connection with this desire. Because you did not drift, you are now
recording a document which gives you exactly what your dominating thoughts
demanded of life.
Q Why doesn't your opposition use hypnotic rhythm to make permanent
one's higher thoughts and nobler deeds? Why does your opposition permit you
to use this stupendous force as a means of entangling people in a web of evil
spun by their own thoughts and deeds? Why does your opposition not outwit
you by binding people with thoughts which build and lift them above your
influence?
A The law of hypnotic rhythm is available to all who will use it. I make
use of it more effectively than does my opposition because I offer people
more attractive bribes to think my sort of thoughts and indulge in my sort of
deeds.
Q In other words, you control people by making negative thinking and
destructive deeds pleasing to them. Is that correct?
A That is the idea, exactly!




Chapter  Seeds of Fear
Q I have often wondered why your opposition— what we earthbound call
God— does not annihilate you? Can you tell me why?
A Because the power is as much mine as his. It is as available to me as to
him. That is what I have been trying to get over to you. The highest power in
the universe can be used for constructive purposes, through what you call
God, or it can be used for negative purposes, through what you call the Devil.
And something more important still, it can be used by any human being just
as effectively as by God or the Devil.
Q You make a far-reaching claim. Can you prove your claim?
A Yes, but it would be better if you proved it for yourself. The Devil's
word is not worth much among you earthbound sinners. Neither is God's word.
You fear the Devil and refuse to trust your God; therefore you have but one
source available through which you may appropriate the benefit of universal
power, and that is by trusting and using your own power of thought. This is
the direct road to the universal storehouse of Infinite Intelligence. There is no
other road available to any human being.
Q Why have we earthbound not found the road to Infinite Intelligence
sooner?
A Because I have intercepted you and led you off the path by planting in
your minds thoughts which destroy your power to use your minds
constructively. I have made it attractive to you to use the Power of Infinite
Intelligence to attain negative ends, through greed, avarice, lust, envy, and
hatred. Remember, your mind attracts that which your mind dwells upon. To
divert you away from my opposition, I had only to feed you on thoughts
helpful to my cause.
Q If I understand what you are saying, you are admitting that no human
being need fear the Devil or worry about how to flatter God!
A That is it precisely. This admission may put a crimp in my style, but I
have this satisfaction of knowing it may also slow down my opposition by
sending people direct to the source of all power.




Q In other words, if you cannot control people through negative bribes or
fear, then you wish to kick over the entire apple cart and show people how to
go directly to God? Are you, by any chance, in politics too? Your technique
seems frightfully familiar.
A Am I in politics? If I am not in politics, who do you believe starts
depressions and forces people into wars? Surely you would not lay this at the
door of my opposition? As I have already told you, I have allies in all walks of
life, to help me in connection with all human relationships.
Q Why don't you take over the churches and use them outright in your
cause?
A Do you think I am a fool? Who would keep alive the fear of the Devil if I
subdued the churches? Who would serve as a decoy to attract the attention of
people while I manipulate their minds if I did not have some agency through
which to sow the seeds of fear and doubt? The cleverest thing I do is to use
the allies of my opposition to keep the fear of hell burning in the minds of
people. As long as people fear something, no matter what, I will keep a grip
on them.
Q I am beginning to see your scheme. You use the churches to plant the
seed of fear and uncertainty and indefiniteness in the minds of people. These
negative states of mind cause people to form the habit of drifting. This habit
crystallizes into permanency through the law of hypnotic rhythm; then the
victim is helpless to help himself, is that right? Hypnotic rhythm, then, is
something to be watched and respected?
A A better way of stating the truth is that hypnotic rhythm is something
to be studied, understood, and voluntarily applied to attain definite desired
ends.
Q If the force of hypnotic rhythm is not voluntarily applied to attain
definite ends, may it be a great danger?
A Yes, and for the reason that it operates automatically. If it is not
consciously applied to attain a desired end, it can, and it will, operate to
attain undesired ends.
Take the simple illustration of climate, for example. Anyone can see and
understand that nature forces every living thing and every element of matter
to adjust itself to her climates. In the tropics she creates trees which bear



fruit and reproduce themselves. She forces the trees to adjust themselves to
her scorching sun! She forces them to put out leaves suitable for protection
against the rays of the sun. These same trees could not survive if removed to
the arctic regions where nature has established an entirely different climate.
In the colder climate she creates trees which are adjusted to survive and
to reproduce themselves, but they could not survive if transplanted in the
tropical regions. In the same manner, nature clothes her animals, giving to
those in each different climate a covering suited to their comfort and survival
in that climate.
In a similar manner, nature forces upon the minds of men the influences
of their environment, which are stronger than the individual's own thoughts.
Children are forced to take on the nature of all influences of those around
them unless their own thoughts are stronger than the influences.
Nature sets up a definite rhythm for every environment, and everything
within the range of that rhythm is forced to conform to it. Man, alone, has
the power to establish his own rhythm of thought providing he exercises this
privilege before hypnotic rhythm has forced upon him the influences of his
environment.
Every home, every place of business, every town and village and every
street and community center has its own definite, discernible rhythm. If you
wish to know what a difference there is in the rhythms of streets, take a walk
up Fifth Avenue, in New York, and then down a street in the slums! All forms
of rhythm become permanent with time.
Q Does each individual have his own rhythm of thought?
A Yes. That is precisely the major difference between individuals. The
person who thinks in terms of power, success, opulence, sets up a rhythm
which attracts these desirable possessions. The person who thinks in terms of
misery, failure, defeat, discouragement, and poverty attracts these
undesirable influences. This explains why both success and failure are the
result of habit. Habit establishes one's rhythm of thought, and that rhythm
attracts the object of one's dominating thoughts.
Q Hypnotic rhythm is something resembling a magnet which attracts
things for which it has a magnetic affinity. Is that correct?




A Yes, that is correct. That is why the poverty-stricken herd themselves
into the same communities. It explains that old saying, "Misery loves
company." It also explains why people who begin to succeed in any
undertaking find that success multiplies, with less effort, as time goes on.
All successful people use hypnotic rhythm, either consciously or
unconsciously, by expecting and demanding success. The demand becomes a
habit, hypnotic rhythm takes over the habit, and the law of harmonious
attraction translates it into its physical equivalent.
Q In other words, if I know what I want from life, demand it and back my
demand by a willingness to pay life's price for what I want, and refuse to
accept any substitutes, the law of hypnotic rhythm takes over my desire and
helps, by natural and logical means, to transmute it into its physical
counterpart. Is that true?
A That describes the way the law works.
Q Science has established irrefutable evidence that people are what they
are because of heredity and environment. They bring over with them at birth
a combination of all the physical qualities of all their numberless ancestors.
After they arrive here, they reach the age of self-consciousness and from
there on they shape their own personalities and more or less fix their own
earthly destinations as the result of the environmental influences to which
they are subjected, especially the influences which control them during early
childhood. These two facts have been so well established there is no room for
any intelligent person to question them. How can hypnotic rhythm change the
nature of a physical body which is a combination of thousands of ancestors
who have lived and died before one is born? How can hypnotic rhythm change
the influence of one's environment? People who are born in poverty and
ignorance have a strong tendency to remain poverty-stricken and ignorant all
through life. What, if anything, can hypnotic rhythm do about this?
A Hypnotic rhythm cannot change the nature of the physical body one
inherits at birth, but it can and it does modify, change, control, and make
permanent one's environmental influences.
Q If I understand what you mean, a human being is forced by nature to
take on and become a part of the environment he chooses or the environment
that may be forced upon him?




A That is correct, but there are ways and means by which an individual
may resist the influences of an environment he does not wish to accept, and
also a method of procedure by which one may reverse the application of
hypnotic rhythm from negative to positive ends.
Q Do you mean that there is a definite method by which hypnotic rhythm
can be made to serve instead of destroy one?
A I mean just that.
Q Tell me how this astounding end may be attained.
A For my description to be of any practical value, it will be necessarily
lengthy because it will have to cover seven principles of psychology which
must be understood and applied by all who use hypnotic rhythm to aid them
in forcing life to yield that which they want.
Q Then break your description into seven parts, each giving a detailed
analysis of one of the seven principles, with simple instructions for its
practical application.




Chapter  Definiteness of Purpose
Q Your Majesty will now proceed to unfold the secrets of the seven
principles through which human beings may force life to provide them with
spiritual, mental, and physical freedom.
Do not be sparing in your description of these principles. I want a
complete illustration of how the principles may be used by anyone who
chooses to use them. Tell us all you know about the principle of definiteness
of purpose.
A If you go through with this mad idea of publishing my confession, you
will open the gates of hell and turn loose all the precious souls I have
collected back down through the ages. You will deprive me of souls yet
unborn. You will release from my bondage millions now living. Stop, I beg of
you.
Q Open up. Let's hear what you have to say about the principle of
definiteness of purpose.
A You are pouring water on the fires of hell, but the responsibility is
yours, not mine. I may as well tell you that any human being who can be
definite in his aims and plans can make life hand over whatever is wanted.
Q That is a broad claim, Your Majesty. Do you wish to tone it down a bit?
A Tone it down? No, I wish to tone it up. When you hear what I now have
to say, you will understand why the principle of definiteness is so important.
My opposition uses a clever little trick to cheat me of my control over people.
The opposition knows that definiteness of purpose closes the door of one's
mind so tightly against me that I cannot break through unless I can induce one
to form the habit of drifting.
Q Why doesn't your opposition give your secret to all people by telling
them to avoid you through definiteness of purpose? You have already
admitted that two out of every hundred people belong to your opposition.
A Because I am more clever than my opposition. I draw people away from
definiteness with my promises. You see, I control more people than my
opposition because I am a better salesman and a better showman. I attract




people by feeding them liberally of the thought-habits in which they like to
indulge.
Q Is definiteness of purpose something with which one must be born or
may it be acquired?
A Everyone, as I have told you before, is born with the privilege of being
definite, but  out of every  people lose this privilege by sleeping on it.
The privilege of definiteness can be maintained only by adopting it as a policy
by which one is guided in all the affairs of life.
Q Oh, I see! One takes advantage of the principle of definiteness just as
one may build a strong physical body— through constant, systematic use. Is
that it?
A You have stated the truth clearly and accurately.
Q Now I think we are getting somewhere, Your Majesty. We have at long
last found the starting point from which all who become self-determining in
life must take off.
We have discovered, from your astounding confession, that your greatest
asset is man's lack of caution, which enables you to lead him into the jungle
of indefiniteness through simple bribes.
We have learned, beyond the question of doubt, that anyone who adopts
definiteness of purpose as a policy and uses it in all of his daily experiences
cannot be induced to form the habit of drifting. Without the aid of the
drifting habit you are powerless to attract people through promises. Is this
correct?
A I couldn't have stated the truth more clearly myself.
Q Go ahead, now, and describe how people neglect their privilege of
being free and self-determining through indefiniteness and drifting.
A I have already made brief reference to this principle, but I will now go
into more minute details as to how the principle works.
I shall have to begin at the time of birth. When a child is born, it brings
with it nothing but a physical body representing the evolutionary results of
millions of years of ancestry.




Its mind is a total blank. When the child reaches the age of consciousness
and begins to recognize the objects of its surroundings, it begins, also, to
imitate others.
Imitation becomes a fixed habit. Naturally the child imitates, first of all,
its parents! Then it begins to imitate its other relatives and daily associates,
including its religious instructors and schoolteachers.
The imitation extends not merely to physical expression, but also to
thought expression. If a child's parents fear me and express that fear within
range of the child's hearing, the child picks up the fear through the habit of
imitation and stores it away as a part of its subconscious stock of beliefs.
If the child's religious instructor expresses any form of fear of me (and
they all do, in one form or another), that fear is added to the similar fear
passed to the child by its parents, and the two forms of negative limitation
are stored away in the subconscious mind to be drawn upon and used by me
later in life.
In a similar way the child learns, by imitation, to limit its power of
thought by filling its mind with envy, hatred, greed, lust, revenge, and all the
other negative impulses of thought which destroy all possibility of
definiteness.
Meanwhile I move in and induce the child to drift until I bind its mind
through hypnotic rhythm.
Q Am I to understand from your remarks that you have to gain control of
people while they are very young or lose your opportunity at them altogether?
A I prefer to claim them before they come into possession of their own
minds. Once any person learns the power of his own thoughts, he becomes
positive and difficult to subdue. As a matter of fact, I cannot control any
human being who discovers and uses the principle of definiteness.
Q Is the habit of definiteness a permanent protection against your
control?
A No, not by any means. Definiteness closes the door of one's mind to me
only as long as that person follows the principle as a matter of policy. Once
any person hesitates, procrastinates, or becomes indefinite about anything,
he is just one step removed from my control.



Q What has definiteness to do with one's material circumstances? I want
to know if one may acquire power through definiteness of purpose without
inviting destruction through the law of compensation.
A Your question limits my illustrations because there are so few people
in the world who understand, and there have been so few in the past who
understood, how to use definiteness of purpose without attracting to
themselves the negative application of the law of compensation.
Here you are forcing me to disclose one of my most prized tricks. I am
bound to tell you that I eventually reclaim for my cause all who escape me
temporarily through definiteness of purpose. The reclamation is made by
filling the mind with greed for power and the love of egotistical expression,
until the individual falls into the habit of violating the rights of others. Then I
step in with the law of compensation and reclaim my victim.
Q So I see from your admission that definiteness of purpose may be
dangerous in proportion to its possibility as a power. Is that true?
A Yes, and what is more important, every principle of good carries with
it the seed of an equivalent danger.
Q That is hard to believe. What danger, for example, can there be in the
habit of love of truth?
A The danger lies in the word "habit." All habits, save only that of the
love of definiteness of purpose, may lead to the habit of drifting. Love for
truth, unless it assumes the proportion of definite pursuit of truth, may
become similar to all other good intentions. You know, of course, what I do
with good intentions.
Q Is love for one's relatives also dangerous?
A The love for anything or anyone, save only the love of definiteness of
purpose, may become dangerous. Love is a state of mind which beclouds
reason, saps will power, and blinds one to facts and truth.
Everyone who becomes self-determining and gains spiritual freedom to
think his own thoughts must examine carefully every emotion that seems
even remotely related to love.




You may be surprised to know that love is one of my most effective
baits. With it I lead into the habit of drifting those whom I could attract with
nothing else.
That is why I have placed it at the head of my list of bribes. Show me
what any person loves most and I will have my cue as to how that person can
be induced to drift until I bind him with hypnotic rhythm.
Love and fear, combined, give me the most effective weapons with
which I induce people to drift. One is as helpful to me as the other. Both have
the effect of causing people to neglect to develop definiteness in the use of
their own minds. Give me control over a person's fears and tell me what he
loves most and you may as well mark that person down as my slave. Both love
and fear are emotional forces of such stupendous potency that either may
completely set aside the power of will and the power of reason. Without will
and reason there is nothing left to support definiteness of purpose.
Q But, Your Majesty, life would not be worth living if people never felt
the emotion of love.
A Ah! You are right as far as your reasoning goes, but you neglected to
add that love should be under one's definite control at all times.
Of course, love is a desirable state of mind, but it also is a palliative
which may be used to limit or destroy reason and will power, both of which
rate above love in importance to human beings who want freedom and selfdetermination.
Q I understand from what you say that people who gain power must
harden their emotions, master fear, and subdue love. Is that correct?
A People who gain and maintain power must become definite in all their
thoughts and all their deeds. If that is what you call hard, then they must
become hard
Q Let us look into the sources of advantage of definiteness in the
everyday affairs of life. Which is more apt to succeed, a weak plan applied
with definiteness, or a sound strong plan indefinitely applied?
A Weak plans have a way of becoming strong if definitely applied.
Q You mean that any plan definitely put into continuous action in pursuit
of a definite purpose may be successful even if it is not the best plan?



A Yes, I mean just that. Definiteness of purpose plus definiteness of plan
by which the purpose is to be achieved generally succeeds, no matter how
weak the plan may be. The major difference between a sound and an
unsound plan is that the sound plan, if definitely applied, may be carried out
more quickly than an unsound plan.
Q In other words, if one cannot be always right one can and should be
always definite? Is that what you are trying to get across to me?
A That is the idea. People who are definite in both their plans and their
purposes never accept temporary defeat as being more than an urge to
greater effort. You can see for yourself that this sort of policy is bound to win
if it is followed with definiteness.
Q Can a person who moves with definiteness of both plan and purpose be
always sure of success?
A No. The best of plans sometimes misfire, but the person who moves
with definiteness recognizes the difference between temporary defeat and
failure. When plans fail he substitutes others but he does not change his
purpose. He perseveres. Eventually he finds a plan that succeeds.
Q Will a plan based upon immoral or unjust ends succeed as quickly as
one motivated by a keen sense of justice and morality?
A Through the operation of the law of compensation, everyone reaps
that which he sows. Plans based on unjust or immoral motives may bring
temporary success, but enduring success must take into consideration the
fourth dimension, time.
Time is the enemy of immorality and injustice. It is the friend of justice
and morality. Failure to recognize this fact has been responsible for the crime
wave among the youths of the world.
The youthful, inexperienced mind is apt to mistake temporary success
for permanency. The youth often makes the mistake of coveting the
temporary gains of immoral, unjust plans, but neglects to look ahead and
observe the penalties which follow as definitely as night follows day.




Chapter  Education and Religion
Q This is pretty deep stuff, Your Majesty. Let us get back to the
discussion of lighter and more concrete subjects that are likely to interest the
majority of people. I am interested in discussing the things that make people
happy and miserable, rich and poor, sick and healthy. In brief, I am
interested in everything that can be used by human beings to make life pay
satisfactory dividends in return for the effort that one puts into the business
of living.
A Very well, let us be definite.
Q You have my idea. Your Majesty has a tendency to stray off into
abstract details which most people can neither understand nor use in the
solution of their problems. Could that, by any chance, be a definite plan of
yours to answer my questions with indefinite answers? If that is your plan, it
is a slick trick but it will not work. Go ahead now and tell me something more
of the miseries and failures of human beings growing directly out of
indefiniteness.
A Why not permit me to tell you more of the pleasures and successes of
people who understand and apply the principle of definiteness?
Q I observe that sometimes people with definiteness of plan and purpose
get what they ask from life only to find after they get it that they do not
want it. What then?
A Generally one can get rid of whatever is not wanted by application of
the same principle of definiteness with which the thing was acquired. A life
that is lived with fullness of peace of mind, contentment, and happiness
always divests itself of everything it does not want. Anyone who submits to
annoyance by things he does not want is not definite. He is a drifter.
Q What about married people who cease to want each other? Should they
separate, or is it true that all marriages are made in heaven and the
contracting parties are, therefore, forever bound by their bargain, even
though it may prove to be a poor one for both.
A First, let me correct that old saying that all marriages are made in
heaven. I know of some which were made on my side of the fence. Minds
which do not harmonize should never be forced to remain together in



marriage or any other relationship. Friction and all forms of discord between
minds lead inevitably to the habit of drifting, and of course to indefiniteness.
Q Aren't people sometimes bound to others by a relationship of duty
which renders it impractical for them to take from life what they want most?
A "Duty" is one of the most abused and misunderstood words in
existence. The first duty of every human being is to himself. Every person
owes himself the duty of finding how to live a full and happy life. Beyond
this, if one has time and energy not needed in the fulfillment of his own
desires, one may assume responsibility for helping others.
Q Isn't that a selfish attitude, and isn't selfishness one of the causes of
failure to find happiness?
A I stand by my statement that there is no higher duty than that which
one owes himself.
Q Doesn't a child owe something in the way of duty to its parents who
gave it life and sustenance during its periods of helplessness?
A Not at all. It is just the other way around. Parents owe their children
everything they can give them in the way of knowledge. Beyond that, parents
often spoil instead of helping their offspring by a false sense of duty which
prompts them to indulge their children instead of forcing them to seek and
gain knowledge at first hand.
Q I see what you mean. Your theory is that too much help thrust upon
the youth encourages him to drift and become indefinite in all things. You
believe that necessity is a teacher of great sagacity, that defeat carries with
it an equivalent virtue, that unearned gifts of every nature may become a
curse instead of a blessing. Is that correct?
A You have stated my philosophy perfectly. My belief is not theory. It is
fact.
Q Then you do not advocate prayer as a means of gaining desirable ends?
A On the contrary I do advocate prayer, but not the sort of prayer that
consists of empty, begging, meaningless words.
The sort of prayer against which I am helpless is the prayer of
definiteness of purpose.



Q I never thought of definiteness of purpose as being a prayer. How can
it be?
A Definiteness is in effect the only sort of prayer upon which one can
rely. It places one in the way of using hypnotic rhythm to attain definite ends
... by the mere act of appropriating it from the great universal storehouse of
Infinite Intelligence. The appropriation, in case you are interested, takes
place through definiteness of purpose, persistently pursued!
Q Why do the majority of prayers fail?
A They don't. All prayers bring that for which one prays.
Q But you just said that definiteness of purpose is the only sort of prayer
upon which one can rely. Now you say that all prayers bring results. What do
you mean?
A There is nothing inconsistent about it. The majority of people who pray
go to prayer only after everything else fails them. Naturally they go with their
minds filled with fear that the prayers will not be answered. Well, their fears
are realized.
The person who goes to prayer with definiteness of purpose and faith in
the attainment of that purpose puts into motion the laws of nature which
transmute one's dominating desires into their physical equivalent. That is all
there is to prayer.
One form of prayer is negative and brings only negative results. One form
is positive and brings definite, positive results. Could anything be more
simple?
People who whine and beg God to assume responsibility for all their
troubles and provide them with all the necessities and luxuries of life are too
lazy to create what they want and translate it into existence through the
power of their own minds.
When you hear a person praying for something that he should procure
through his own efforts, you may be sure you are listening to a drifter.
Infinite Intelligence favors only those who understand and adapt themselves
to her laws. She makes no discrimination because of fine character or
pleasing personality. These things help people negotiate their way through
life more harmoniously with one another, but the source from which prayer is
answered is not impressed by fine feathers. Nature's law is, "Know what you



want, adapt yourself to my laws, and you shall have it." Q Does that
harmonize with the teachings of Christ?
A Perfectly. Also it harmonizes with the teachings of all truly great
philosophers.
Q Is your theory of definiteness in harmony with the philosophy of men
of science?
A Definiteness is the major difference between a scientist and a drifter.
Through the principle of definiteness of purpose and plan, the scientist forces
nature to hand over her most profound secrets. It was through this principle
that Edison uncovered the secret of the talking machine, the incandescent
electric light, and scores of other benefits for mankind.
Q Then I understand that definiteness is the first requisite for success in
all earthly undertakings? Is that right?
A Exactly! Anything which teaches people to examine facts and
coordinate them into definite plans through accurate thinking is hard on my
profession. If this thirst for definite knowledge now spreading over the world
keeps up, my business will be shot to pieces within the next few centuries. I
thrive on ignorance, superstition, intolerance, and fear, but I cannot stand up
under definite knowledge properly organized into definite plans in the minds
of people who think for themselves.
Q Why don't you take over Omnipotence and manage the whole works in
your own way?
A You might as well ask why the negative portion of the electron doesn't
take over the positive portion and run the entire works. The answer is that
both the positive and the negative charges of energy are necessary to the
existence of the electron. One is balanced equally against the other,
stalemated, as it were.
So it is with what you call Omnipotence and I. We represent the positive
and the negative forces of the entire system of universes, and we are equally
balanced one against the other.
If this power of balance were shifted the slightest degree, the whole
system of universes would become quickly reduced to a mass of inert matter.
Now you know why I cannot take over the whole show and run it my way.



Q If what you say is true, you have exactly the same power as
Omnipotence. Is that true?
A That is correct. My opposition— you call it Omnipotenceexpresses itself
through the forces which you call good, the positive forces of nature. I
express myself through the forces you call bad, the negative forces. Both
good and bad are coincidental with existence. One is as important as the
other.
Q Then the doctrine of predestination is sound. People are born to
success or failure, misery or happiness, to be good or bad, and they have
nothing to do with this nor can they modify their natures. Is that your claim?
A Emphatically not! Every human being has a wide range of choice in
both his thoughts and his deeds. Every human being can use his brain for the
reception and the expression of positive thoughts or he can use it for the
expression of negative thoughts. His choice in this important matter shapes
his entire life.
Q From what you have said I gather the idea that human beings have
more freedom of expression than either you or your opposition. Is that
correct?
A That is true. Omnipotence and I are bound by immutable laws of
nature. We cannot express ourselves in any manner not conforming to these
laws.
Q Then it is true that man has rights and privileges not available to
either Omnipotence or the Devil. Is that the truth?
A Yes, that is true, but you might well have added that man has not yet
fully awakened to the realization of this potential power. Man still regards
himself as something resembling the worms in the dust, when in reality he
has more power than all other living things combined.
Q Definiteness of purpose seems to be a panacea for all evils of man.
A Not that perhaps, but you may be sure no one ever will become selfdetermining without it.
Q Why aren't children taught definiteness of purpose in the public
schools?



A For the reason that there is no definite plan or purpose behind any of
the school curricula! Children are sent to school to make credits and to learn
how to memorize, not to learn what they want of life.
Q What good is a school credit if one cannot convert it into the material
and spiritual needs of life?
A I am only a Devil, not an unwinder of riddles!
Q I deduce from all you say that neither the schools nor the churches
prepare the youths of the world with a practical working knowledge of their
own minds. Is anything of more importance to a human being than an
understanding of the forces and circumstances which influence his own mind?
A The only thing of enduring value to any human being is a working
knowledge of his own mind. The churches do not permit a person to inquire
into the possibilities of his own mind, and the schools do not recognize that
such a thing as a mind exists.
Q Aren't you a little hard on the schools and the churches?
A No, I am merely describing them as they are, without bias or
prejudice.
Q Aren't the schools and the churches your bitter enemies?
A Their leaders may think they are, but I am impressed only by facts.
The truth is this, if you must know it the churches are my most helpful allies
and the schools run the churches a close second.
Q On what specific or general grounds do you make this claim?
A On the grounds that both the churches and the schools help me to
convert people to the habit of drifting.
Q Do you realize that your charge is substantially a sweeping indictment
of the two institutions of major importance which have been responsible for
civilization, in its present form?
A Do I realize it? Man alive, I gloat over it. If the schools and churches
had taught people how to think for themselves, where would I be, now?
Q This confession of yours will disillusion millions of people whose only
hope for salvation is in their churches. Isn't that a cruel thing to do to them?



Wouldn't most people be better off living in the bliss of ignorance than to
know the truth about you?
A What do you mean by the term "salvation"? From what are people being
saved? The only form of enduring salvation that is worth a green fig to any
human being is that which comes from recognition of the power of his own
mind. Ignorance and fear are the only enemies from which men need
salvation.
Q You seem to hold nothing sacred.
A You are wrong. I hold sacred the one thing which is my master— the
one thing I fear.
Q What is that?
A The power of independent thought backed by definiteness of purpose.
Q Then you do not have many people to fear?
A Only two out of every  to be exact. I control all others.
Q Let's give the churches a rest and get back to the public schools. Your
confession has shown clearly that you thrive and perpetuate yourself from
one generation to another by the clever trick of taking over the minds of
children before they have the chance to learn how to use their minds.
I wish to know what is wrong with a public school system that permits
the Devil to control so many people. I wish to know, also, what can be done
to the established system of teaching that will insure all children the
opportunity to learn, first, that they have minds, and second, how to use
those minds to bring spiritual and economic freedom.
I am putting the question to you definitely enough, and since you have
stressed the importance of definiteness of purpose I am here and now putting
you on notice that your answer to my question must be definite.
A Wait a moment while I catch my breath. You have given me quite an
order! It seems strange that you would come to the Devil to learn how to live.
I should think you would go to my opposition. Why don't you?
Q Your Majesty, it is you who are on trial here, not I. I want the truth
and I am not particular as to the source from which I get it. There is
something radically wrong with the system of education that has given us a



balance sheet with life that shows us hopelessly in the red and groping for the
road to self-determination as if we were so many animals lost in the jungle.
I want to know two things about this system. First, what is the major
weakness of the system? Second, how can this weakness be eliminated? The
floor is yours again! Please stick to the question and stop trying to decoy me
into the discussion of deep, abstract subjects. That's definite, is it not?
A You leave me no choice but that of direct answer. To begin with, the
public school system approaches the subject of education from the wrong
angle. The school system endeavors to teach children to memorize facts,
instead of teaching them how to use their own minds.
Q Is that all that is wrong with the system?
A No, that is only the beginning. Another major weakness of the school
system is that it does not establish in the minds of children either the
importance of definiteness of purpose or make any attempt to teach youths
how to be definite about anything.
The major object of all schooling is to force the students to cram their
memories with facts instead of teaching them how to organize and make
practical use of facts.
This cramming system centers the attention of students on the
accumulation of "credits" but overlooks the important question of how to use
knowledge in the practical affairs of life. This system turns out graduates
whose names are inscribed upon parchment certificates, but whose minds are
empty of self-determination. The school system got off to a bad start at the
beginning. The schools began as institutions of "higher learning," operated
entirely for the select few whose wealth and family entitled them to
education.
Thus the entire school system was evolved by beginning at the top and
working back down to the bottom. It is no wonder the system neglects to
teach children the importance of definiteness of purpose when the system,
itself, has literally evolved through indefiniteness.
Q What would correct this weakness of the public school system? Let's
not complain of the weakness of the system unless we are prepared to offer a
practical remedy with which it can be corrected. In other words, while we




are discussing the importance of definiteness of plan and purpose, let us take
our own medicine and be definite.
A Why don't you lay off the schools and churches and save yourself plenty
of trouble? Don't you know that you are poking your nose into the affairs of
the two forces that control the world? Suppose you do show up the schools
and the churches as being weak and inadequate for the needs of human
beings? What then? With what are you going to replace these two institutions?
Q Stop trying to evade my questions by the old trick of asking a counterquestion! I do not propose to replace the schools and churches. But I do
propose to find out, if I can, how these organized forces can be modified so
they will serve people instead of keeping them in ignorance. Go ahead, now,
and give me a detailed catalogue of all the changes in the public school
system which would improve it.
A So you want the entire catalogue, do you? Do you want the suggested
changes in the order of their importance?
Q Describe the changes needed just as they come to you.
A You are forcing me to commit an act of treason against myself, but
here it is
Reverse the present system by giving children the privilege of leading in
their school work instead of following orthodox rules designed only to impart
abstract knowledge. Let instructors serve as students and let the students
serve as instructors.
As far as possible, organize all school work into definite methods through
which the student can learn by doing, and direct the class work so that every
student engages in some form of practical labor connected with the daily
problems of life.
Ideas are the beginning of all human achievement. Teach all students
how to recognize practical ideas that may be of benefit in helping them
acquire whatever they demand of life.
Teach the students how to budget and use time, and above all teach the
truth that time is the greatest asset available to human beings and the
cheapest.




Teach the student the basic motives by which all people are influenced
and show how to use these motives in acquiring the necessities and the
luxuries of life.
Teach children what to eat, how much to eat, and what is the
relationship between proper eating and sound health.
Teach children the true nature and function of the emotion of sex, and
above all, teach them that it can be transmuted into a driving force capable
of lifting one to great heights of achievement.
Teach children to be definite in all things, beginning with the choice of a
definite major purpose in life!
Teach children the nature of and possibilities for good and evil in the
principle of habit, using as illustrations with which to dramatize the subject
the everyday experiences of children and adults.
Teach children how habits become fixed through the law of hypnotic
rhythm, and influence them to adopt, while in the lower grades, habits that
will lead to independent thought!
Teach children the difference between temporary defeat and failure,
and show them how to search for the seed of an equivalent advantage which
comes with every defeat.
Teach children to express their own thoughts fearlessly and to accept or
reject, at will, all ideas of others, reserving to themselves, always, the
privilege of relying upon their own judgment.
Teach children to reach decisions promptly and to change them, if at all,
slowly and with reluctance, and never without a definite reason.
Teach children that the human brain is the instrument with which one
receives, from the great storehouse of nature, the energy which is specialized
into definite thoughts; that the brain does not think, but serves as an
instrument for the interpretation of stimuli which cause thought.
Teach children the value of harmony in their own minds and that this is
attainable only through self-control.
Teach children the nature and the value of self-control.




Teach children that there is a law of increasing returns which can be and
should be put into operation, as a matter of habit, by rendering always more
service and better service than is expected of them.
Teach children the true nature of the Golden Rule, and above all show
them that through the operation of this principle, everything they do to and
for another they do also to and for themselves.
Teach children not to have opinions unless they are formed from facts or
beliefs which may reasonably be accepted as facts.
Teach children that cigarettes, liquor, narcotics, and overindulgence in
sex destroy the power of will and lead to the habit of drifting. Do not forbid
these evils— just explain them.
Teach children the danger of believing anything merely because their
parents, religious instructors, or someone else says it is so.
Teach children to face facts, whether they are pleasant or unpleasant,
without resorting to subterfuge or offering alibis.
Teach children to encourage the use of their sixth sense through which
ideas present themselves in their minds from unknown sources, and to
examine all such ideas carefully.
Teach children the full import of the law of compensation as it was
interpreted by Ralph Waldo Emerson, and show them how the law works in
the small, everyday affairs of life.
Teach children that definiteness of purpose, backed by definite plans
persistently and continuously applied, is the most efficacious form of prayer
available to human beings.
Teach children that the space they occupy in the world is measured
definitely by the quality and quantity of useful service they render the world.
Teach children there is no problem which does not have an appropriate
solution and that the solution often may be found in the circumstance
creating the problem.
Teach children that their only real limitations are those which they set
up or permit others to establish in their own minds.




Teach them that man can achieve whatever man can conceive and
believe!
Teach children that all schoolhouses and all textbooks are elementary
implements which may be helpful in the development of their minds, but that
the only school of real value is the great University of Life wherein one has
the privilege of learning from experience.
Teach children to be true to themselves at all times and, since they
cannot please everybody, therefore to do a good job of pleasing themselves.
Q That is an imposing list, but it seems conspicuous by the fact it ignores
practically every subject now taught in the public schools. Was that intended?
A Yes. You asked for a list of suggested changes in public school curricula
which would benefit children— well, that is what you got.
Q Some of the changes you suggest are so unorthodox they would shock
most of the educators of today, wouldn't they?
A Most of the educators of today need to be shocked. A good sound shock
often helps the brain that has been atrophied by habit.
Q Would the changes you suggest for the public schools give children
immunity against the habit of drifting?
A Yes, that is one of the results the changes would bring, but there are
others too.
Q How could the suggested changes be forced into the public school
system? You know, of course, it is as difficult to get a new idea into an
educator's brain as it is to interest a religious leader in modifying religion so it
will help people to get more from life.
A The quickest and surest way to force practical ideas into the public
schools is to first introduce the ideas through private schools and establish
such a demand for their use that public school officials will be compelled to
employ them.
Q Should any other changes be made in the public school system?
A Yes, many. Among other changes needed in all public school programs
is the addition of a complete course of training in the psychology of



harmonious negotiation between people. All children should be taught how to
sell their way through life with the minimum amount of friction.
Every public school should teach the principles of individual achievement
through which one may attain a position of financial independence.
Classes should be abolished altogether. They should be replaced by the
round table or conference system such as businessmen employ. All students
should receive individual instruction and guidance in connection with subjects
which cannot be properly taught in groups.
Every school should have an auxiliary group of instructors consisting of
business and professional people, scientists, artists, engineers, and
newspapermen, each of whom would impart to all the students a practical
working knowledge of his own profession, business, or occupation. This
instruction should be conducted through the conference system, to save the
time of the instructors.
Q What you have suggested is, in effect, an auxiliary system of
instruction that would give all school children a working knowledge of the
practical affairs of life, direct from the original source. Is that the idea?
A You've stated it correctly.
Q Let us dismiss the public school system and go back to the churches for
a moment. All my life I have heard clergymen preaching against sin and
warning sinners to beware and repent so they could be saved. But I have
never heard any of them tell me what sin is. Will you give me some light on
this subject?
A Sin is anything one does or thinks which causes one to be unhappy!
Human beings who are in sound physical and spiritual health should be at
peace with themselves and always happy. Any form of mental or physical
misery indicates the presence of sin.
Q Name some of the common forms of sin.
A It is a sin to overeat because that leads to ill health and misery.
It is a sin to over-indulge in sex because that breaks down one's will
power and leads to the habit of drifting.




It is a sin to permit one's mind to be dominated by negative thoughts of
envy, greed, fear, hatred, intolerance, vanity, self-pity, or discouragement,
because these states of mind lead to the habit of drifting.
It is a sin to cheat, lie, and steal, because these habits destroy selfrespect, subdue one's conscience, and lead to unhappiness.
It is a sin to remain in ignorance because that leads to poverty and loss
of self-reliance.
It is a sin to accept from life anything one does not want because that
indicates an unpardonable neglect to use the mind.
Q Is it a sin for one to drift through life, without definite aim, plan, or
purpose?
A Yes, because this habit leads to poverty and destroys the privilege of
self-determination. It also deprives one of the privilege of using his own mind
as a medium of contact with Infinite Intelligence.
Q Are you the chief inspirer of sin?
A Yes! It is my business to gain control of the minds of people in every
way possible.
Q Can you control the mind of a person who commits no sin?
A I cannot, because that person never permits his mind to be dominated
by any form of negative thought. I cannot enter the mind of one who never
sins, let alone control it.
Q What is the commonest and most destructive of all sins?
A Fear and ignorance.
Q Have you nothing else to add to the list?
A There is nothing else to be added.
Q What is faith?
A It is a state of mind wherein one recognizes and uses the power of
positive thought as a medium by which one contacts and draws upon the
universal store of Infinite Intelligence at will.



Q In other words, faith is the absence of all forms of negative thought. Is
that the idea?
A Yes, that is another way of describing it.
Q Has a drifter the capacity to use faith?
A He may have the capacity but he does not use it. Everyone has the
potential power to clear his mind of all negative thoughts and thereby avail
himself of the power of faith.
Q Stating the matter in another way, faith is definiteness of purpose
backed by belief in the attainment of the object of that purpose. Is that
correct?
A That's the idea, exactly.




Chapter  Self-Discipline
Q What preparation must one undergo before being able to move with
definiteness of purpose at all times?
A One must gain mastery over self. This is the second of the seven
principles. The person who is not master of himself can never be master of
others. Lack of self-mastery is, of itself, the most destructive form of
indefiniteness. Q Where should one begin when making a start at control
over self?
A By mastering the three appetites responsible for most of one's lack of
self-discipline. The three appetites are () the desire for food, () the desire
for expression of sex, () the desire to express loosely organized opinions.
Q Does man have other appetites which need control?
A Yes, many of them, but these three are the ones which should be
conquered first. When a man becomes master of these three appetites, he
has developed enough self-discipline to conquer easily those of lesser
importance.
Q But these are natural appetites. They must be indulged if one is to be
healthy and happy.
A To be sure they are natural appetites, but they are also dangerous
because people who have not mastered themselves overfeed the appetites.
Self-mastery contemplates sufficient control over the appetites to enable one
to feed them what they need and withhold food not needed.
Q Your viewpoint is both interesting and educational. Describe the
details through which I may understand how and under what circumstances
people over-feed the appetites.
A Take the desire for physical food, for example. The majority of people
are so weak in self-discipline they fill their stomachs with combinations of
rich food which please the taste but overwork the organs of digestion and
elimination.
They pour into their stomachs both quantity and combinations of food
which the body chemist can dispose of only by converting the food into
deadly toxic poisons.



These poisons clog and stagnate the body sewer system until it slows
down in its work of elimination of waste matter. After a while the sewer
system stops working altogether, and the victim has what he calls
"constipation."
By that time he is ready for the hospital. Auto-intoxication, or body
sewer poisoning, takes the machinery of the brain and rolls it into something
resembling a wad of putty.
The victim then becomes sluggish in his physical movements and
mentally irritable and fussy. If he could only take one good look at, and one
bad smell of, his sewer system, he would be ashamed to look himself in the
face.
City sewers are not the pleasantest of places when they become overloaded or clogged, but they are clean and sweet compared with the intestinal
sewer when it has been overloaded or clogged. This is not a pretty story to be
associated with the pleasant and necessary act of eating, but that is where it
belongs because over-eating and wrong food combinations are the evils which
cause auto-intoxication.
People who eat wisely and keep their body sewers clean handicap me
because a clean body sewer generally means a sound body and a brain that
functions properly.
Imagine— if your imagination can be stretched that farhow any human
being could move with definiteness of purpose with his body sewer filled with
enough poison to kill a hundred people if it were injected into their
bloodstream directly. Q And all this trouble is the result of lack of control
over the physical appetite for food?
A Well, if you wish to be absolutely correct you should say that improper
eating is responsible for the majority of the ills of the body, and practically
all headaches.
If you want proof of this, select  people suffering with headaches and
give each of them a thorough washing out of their body sewer systems with a
high enema, and observe that no fewer than ninety-five of the headaches will
disappear within a few minutes after their sewers have been cleaned.




Q From all you say about the intestinal tract, I gather the impression
that mastery over the physical appetite for food means also mastery over the
habit of neglecting to keep the intestines clean?
A Yes, that is true. It is just as important to eliminate the waste matter
of the body and the unused portions of food as it is to take the right amount
and the correct combinations of food.
Q I never thought of auto-intoxication as being one of your devices of
control over people, and I am utterly shocked to know how many people are
victims of this subtle enemy. Let's hear what you have to say of the other two
appetites.
A Well, take the desire for sex expression. Now there is a force with
which I master the weak and the strong, the old and the young, the ignorant
and the wise. In fact, I master all who neglect to master sex!
Q How can one master the emotion of sex?
A By the simple process of transmuting that emotion into some form of
activity other than copulation. Sex is one of the greatest of all forces which
motivate human beings. Because of this fact it is also one of the most
dangerous forces. If humans would control their sex desires and transmute
them into a driving force with which to carry on their occupation— that is, if
they spent on their work one half the time they dissipate in pursuit of sex,
they would never know poverty.
Q Do I understand you to imply there is a relationship between sex and
poverty?
A Yes, where sex is not under definite control. If allowed to run its
natural course, sex will quickly lead one into the habit of drifting.
Q Is there any relationship between sex and leadership?
A Yes, all great leaders in every walk of life are highly sexed, but they
follow the habit of controlling their sex desires, switching them into a driving
force behind their occupation.
Q Is the habit of over-indulgence in sex as dangerous as the habit of
taking narcotics or liquor?




A There is no difference between these habits. Both lead to hypnotic
control, through the habit of drifting!
Q Why does the world look upon sex as something vulgar?
A Because of the vulgar abuse people have made of this emotion. It is
not sex that is vulgar. It is the individual who neglects or refuses to control
and guide it.
Q Do you mean, by your statement, that one should not indulge the
desire for sex?
A No, I mean that sex, like all other forces available to man, should be
understood, mastered, and made to serve man. The desire for sex expression
is as natural as the desire for food. The desire can no more be killed than one
can entirely stop a river from flowing. If the emotion of sex is shut off from
the natural mode of expression, it will break out in some other less desirable
form, just as a river will, if dammed, break through and flow around the
dam. The person who has self-discipline understands the emotion of sex,
respects it, and learns to control and transmute it into constructive activities.
Q Just what damage is there in over-indulgence of sex?
A The greatest damage is that it depletes the source of man's greatest
driving force, and wastes, without adequate compensation, man's creative
energy.
It dissipates energy needed by nature to maintain physical health. Sex is
nature's most useful therapeutic force.
It depletes the magnetic energy which is the source of an attractive,
pleasing personality.
It removes the sparkle from one's eyes and sets up discord in the tone of
one's voice.
It destroys enthusiasm, subdues ambition, and leads inevitably to the
habit of drifting on all subjects.
Q I would like for you to answer my question in another way by telling
me what beneficial ends the emotion of sex may be made to attain, if
mastered and transmuted.




A Controlled sex supplies the magnetic force that attracts people to one
another. It is the most important factor of a pleasing personality.
It gives quality to the tone of voice and enables one to convey through
the voice any feeling desired.
It serves, as nothing else can serve, to give motive-power to one's
desires.
It keeps the nervous system charged with the energy needed to carry on
the work of maintaining the body.
It sharpens the imagination and enables one to create useful ideas.
It gives quickness and definiteness to one's physical and mental
movements.
It gives one persistence and perseverance in the pursuit of one's major
purpose in life.
It is a great antidote for all fear.
It gives one immunity against discouragement.
It helps to master laziness and procrastination.
It gives one physical and mental endurance while undergoing any form of
opposition or defeat.
It gives one the fighting qualities necessary under all circumstances for
self-defense.
In brief, it makes winners and not quitters!
Q Are those all the advantages you claim for controlled sex energy?
A No, they are only some of the more important benefits it provides.
Perhaps some will believe the greatest of all the virtues of sex is that it is
nature's method of perpetuation of all living things. This alone should remove
all thought that sex is vulgar.
Q I gather, from what you say, that the emotion of sex is a virtue, not a
fault.




A It is a virtue when controlled and directed to the attainment of
desirable ends. It is a fault when neglected and permitted to lead to acts of
lust.
Q Why aren't these truths taught to children by their parents and the
public schools?
A The neglect is due to ignorance of the real nature of sex.
It is just as necessary in maintaining health for one to understand and
properly use the emotion of sex as it is to keep the body sewer system clean.
Both subjects should be taught in all public schools and all homes where
there are children.
Q Wouldn't the majority of parents need instruction on the proper
function and use of sex before they could intelligently teach their children?
A Yes, and so would the public schoolteachers.
Q What relative position of importance would you give to the need for
accurate knowledge on the subject of sex?
A It is next to the top of the list. There is but one thing of greater
importance to human beings. That is accurate thought.
Q Do I understand you to say that knowledge of the true functions of sex
and ability to think accurately are the two things of greatest importance to
mankind?
A That is what I intended you to understand. Accurate thinking comes
first because it is the solution to all man's problems, the answer to all his
prayers, the source of opulence and all material possessions. Accurate
thinking is aided by properly controlled and directed sex emotion because sex
emotion is the same energy as that with which one thinks. It begins with
those who desire self-determination sufficiently to be willing to pay its price.
No one can be entirely free— spiritually, mentally, physically, and
economically— without learning the art of accurate thinking. No one can
learn to think accurately without including, as a part of the needed
knowledge, information on the control of sex emotion through transmutation.
Q It will be a great surprise to many people to learn there is so close a
relationship between thinking and sex emotion. Tell us, now, about the third
appetite, and let's see what it has to do with self-discipline.



A The habit of expressing loosely organized opinions is one of the most
destructive of habits. Its destructiveness consists in its tendency to influence
people to guess instead of searching for the facts when they form opinions,
create ideas, or organize plans.
The habit develops a grasshopper mind— one that jumps from one thing
to another but never completes anything.
And of course, carelessness in the expression of opinions leads to the
habit of drifting. From there it is only a step or two until one is bound by the
law of hypnotic rhythm which automatically prohibits accurate thinking.
Q What other disadvantages are there in free expression of opinions?
A The person who talks too much informs the world of his aims and plans
and gives to others the opportunity to profit by his ideas.
Wise men keep their plans to themselves and refrain from expressing
uninvited opinions. This prevents others from appropriating their ideas and
makes it difficult for others to interfere with their plans.
Q Why do so many people indulge in the habit of expressing uninvited
opinions?
A The habit is one way of expressing egotism and vanity. The desire for
self-expression is inborn in people. The motive behind the habit is to attract
the attention of others and to impress them favorably. Actually it has just the
opposite effect. When the self-invited speaker attracts attention, it usually is
unfavorable.
Q Yes, what other disadvantages has the habit?
A The person who insists on talking seldom has an opportunity to learn by
listening to others.
Q But isn't it true that a magnetic speaker often puts himself in the way
of opportunity to benefit himself by attracting the attention of others through
his powers of oratory?
A Yes, a magnetic orator does have an asset of tremendous value in his
ability to impress people by his speech, but he cannot make the best use of
this asset if he forces his speech on others without their invitation.




No single quality adds more to one's personality than the ability to speak
with emotional feeling, force, and conviction, but the speaker must not
impose his speech upon others without being invited to do so. There is an old
saying that nothing is worth more than its actual cost. This applies as well to
the free uninvited expression of opinions as to material things.
Q What about people who volunteer their opinions by expressing them in
writing? Do they also suffer by lack of self-discipline?
A One of the worst pests on earth is the person who writes uninvited
letters to people of prominence. Men in public office, moving picture stars,
men who have succeeded in business or written a best-selling book, and
people whose names appear often in the newspapers are continuously
besieged by people who write letters expressing their opinion on all subjects.
Q But the writing of uninvited letters is a harmless way of finding
pleasure through self-expression, is it not? What damage does one do by the
habit? A Habits are contagious. Every habit attracts a flock of its relatives.
The habit of doing anything that is useless leads to the formation of other
habits that are useless, especially the habit of drifting.
But that is not all the dangers associated with the habit of indulging in
uninvited expression of opinions. The habit creates enemies and places in
their hands dangerous weapons by which they may do great injury to the one
who indulges in it. Thieves and confidence men and racketeers pay big prices
for the names and addresses of the writers of uninvited letters, knowing as
they do the writers of these letters become easy victims of all manner of
schemes that result in the loss of their money. They refer to the writers of
such letters as "nuts." If you wish to know how foolish people are who write
uninvited letters, read the "nut column" of any newspaper— the column in
which the paper publishes the voluntary opinions of its readers— and you will
see for yourself how the writers of such letters antagonize people and invite
opposition from others.
Q I had no idea, Your Majesty, that people get into so much difficulty
through uninvited expression of their opinions, but now that you have brought
up the subject I do remember writing the editor of a prominent magazine an
uninvited letter of criticism which cost me a fine position on his staff, at a fat
salary.
A That is a perfect example. The proper place to begin self-discipline is
right where you stand. The way to begin is by recognizing the truth— that



there is nothing for good or evil throughout the myriads of universes except
the power of natural law. There is no individual personality anywhere
throughout the myriad of universes with the slightest power to influence a
human being save nature and human beings themselves.
There is no human being now living, no human being has ever lived, and
no human being ever will live with the right or the power to deprive another
human being of the inborn privilege of free and independent thought. That
privilege is the only one over which any human being can have absolute
control. No adult human being ever loses the right to freedom of thought, but
most humans lose the benefits of this privilege either by neglect or because it
has been taken away from them by their parents or religious instructors
before the age of understanding. These are self-evident truths, no less
important because they are being called to your attention by the Devil than
they would be if brought to your attention by my opposition.
Q But what are people going to lean upon in the hour of emergency when
they know not where nor to whom to appeal?
A Let them lean upon the only dependable power available to any human
being.
Q And what is that?
A Themselves! The power of their own thoughts. The only power they
can control and may rely upon. The only power which cannot be perverted,
colored, modified, and falsified by their dishonest fellow human beings.
Q All you say seems logical, but why must I come to the Devil to discover
such profound truths? Let's get back to the seven principles. You have already
disclosed enough information to show clearly that the secret of how to break
the power of hypnotic rhythm is wrapped in the seven principles. You have
shown, too, that the most important of these principles is self-discipline. Now
go ahead and describe the other five principles you have not yet mentioned,
and indicate what part they play in giving one self-discipline.
A First, let me summarize that part of my confession we have already
covered.
I have frankly told you that my two most effective devices for mastering
human beings are the habit of drifting and the law of hypnotic rhythm. I have




shown you that drifting is not a natural law, but a man-made habit which
leads to man's submission to the law of hypnotic rhythm.
The seven principles are the media by which man may break the hold of
hypnotic rhythm and take possession, again, of his own mind. You see,
therefore, the seven principles are the seven steps which lead victims of
hypnotic rhythm out of the self-made prisons in which they are bound.
Q The seven principles are the master key that unlocks the door to
spiritual, mental, and economic self-determination? Is that true?
A Yes, that's another way of stating the truth.




Chapter  Learning From Adversity
Q IS FAILURE EVER A BENEFIT TO MAN?
A Yes. Indeed, learning from adversity is the third of the seven
principles. But few people know that every adversity brings with it the seed
of an equivalent advantage. Still fewer people know the difference between
temporary defeat and failure. If this knowledge were generally known, I
would be deprived of one of my strongest weapons of control over human
beings.
Q But I understood you to say that failure is one of your greatest allies. I
got the impression from your confession that failure causes people to lose
ambition and quit trying, and then you take them over without opposition on
their part.
A That is just the point. I take them over after they quit trying. If they
knew the difference between temporary defeat and failure, they would not
quit when they meet with opposition from life. If they knew that every form
of defeat, and all failures, bring with them the seed of unborn opportunity,
they would keep on fighting and win. Success usually is but one short step
beyond the point where one quits fighting.
Q Is that all one might learn from adversity, defeat, and failure?
A No, that is the least of what one might learn. I hate to tell you this,
but failure often serves as a blessing in disguise because it breaks the grip of
hypnotic rhythm and frees the mind for a fresh start.
Q Now we are getting somewhere. So you have confessed, at long last,
that even nature's law of hypnotic rhythm can be and often is annulled by
nature herself. Is that correct?
A No, that is not stating the matter accurately. Nature never reverses
any of her natural laws. Nature does not take away a human being's freedom
of thought through hypnotic rhythm. The individual gives up his freedom by
abuse of this law. If a man jumped from a tree and was killed by the sudden
impact of his body with the earth, through the law of gravity, you wouldn't
say nature murdered him, would you? You would say the man neglected to
relate himself properly to the law of gravity.



Q I am beginning to see. The law of hypnotic rhythm is capable of both
negative and positive application. It may drag one down to slavery through
loss of the privilege of freedom of thought, or it may help one rise to great
heights of achievement through the free use of thought, depending on how
the individual relates himself to the law. Is that correct?
A Now you have it right.
Q But what about failure? One does not fail intentionally, with purpose
aforethought. No one encourages temporary defeat. These are circumstances
over which the individual often has no control whatsoever. How, then, can it
be said that nature does not take away one's freedom of thought when failure
destroys ambition, will power, and the self-confidence essential to make a
fresh start?
A Failure is a man-made circumstance. It is never real until it has been
accepted by man as permanent. Stating it another way, failure is a state of
mind; therefore, it is something an individual can control until he neglects to
exercise this privilege. Nature does not force people to fail. But nature does
impose her law of hypnotic rhythm upon all minds and through this law gives
permanency to the thoughts which dominate those minds.
In other words, failure thoughts are taken over by the law of hypnotic
rhythm and made permanent if the individual accepts any circumstances as
being permanent failure. That same law just as readily takes over and makes
permanent thoughts of success.
Q What part, then, does failure play in helping an individual break the
grip of hypnotic rhythm after that law has been fastened upon his mind?
A Failure brings a climax in which one has the privilege of clearing his
mind of fear and making a new start in another direction. Failure proves
conclusively that something is wrong with one's aims or the plans by which
the object of these aims is sought. Failure is the dead end of the habit-path
one has been following, and when it is reached it forces one to leave that
path and take up another, thereby creating a new rhythm.
But failure does more than this. It gives an individual an opportunity to
test himself wherein he may learn how much will power he possesses. Failure
also forces people to learn many truths they would never discover without it.
Failure often leads an individual to an understanding of the power of self


discipline without which no one could turn back after having once been the
victim of hypnotic rhythm.
Study the lives of all people who achieve outstanding success in any
calling and observe, with profit, that their success is usually in exact ratio to
their experiences of defeat before succeeding. Q Is this all you have to say
of the advantages of failure?
A No, I have barely begun. If you want the real significance of adversity,
failure, defeat, and all other experiences which break up a human being's
habits and force him to form new habits, watch nature at her work. Nature
uses illness to break the physical rhythm of the body when the cells and
organs become improperly related. She uses economic depressions to break
the rhythm of mass thought when great numbers of people become
improperly related— through business, social, and political activities. And she
uses failure to break the rhythm of negative thought when an individual
becomes improperly related to himself in his own mind.
Observe carefully and you will see that everywhere in nature there is
always at work a natural law which gives eternal change to all matter, all
energy, and to the power of thought. The only permanent thing in the
universes is change. Eternal, inexorable change— through which every atom
of matter and every unit of energy has the opportunity to properly relate
itself to all other units of matter and energy, and every human being has the
opportunity and the privilege of properly relating himself to all other human
beings no matter how many mistakes he makes, or how many times or in what
ways he may be defeated.
When mass failure overtakes a nation, such as the  world business
depression, the circumstance is in perfect harmony with nature's plan to
break up man's habits and give out fresh opportunities.
Q What you are saying intrigues me. Am I to understand that hypnotic
rhythm has something to do with the way people relate themselves to one
another?
A That abstract, elusive thing called character is nothing but a
manifestation of the law of hypnotic rhythm; therefore, when speaking of
one's character it would be proper to say his thought-habits have been
crystallized into a positive or a negative personality, through hypnotic
rhythm. One is good or bad because of the knitting together of his thoughts
and deeds through hypnotic rhythm. One is bound by poverty or blessed with



abundance because his aims, plans, and desires, or lack of them, have been
made permanent and real by hypnotic rhythm.
Q Is that all you have to say of the connection between hypnotic rhythm
and human relationships?
A No, I have just begun. Remember while I am talking I am speaking of
the influence of hypnotic rhythm in connection with all human relationships.
Men who succeed in business do so entirely because of the way they relate
themselves to their associates and to others outside of the business.
Professional men who succeed do so largely because of the manner in
which they relate themselves to their clients. It is much more important for
the lawyer to know people and to know the laws of nature than it is to know
the law. And the doctor is a failure before he starts unless he knows how to
relate himself to his patients so as to establish their faith in him.
Marriage succeeds or fails entirely because of the manner in which the
participants relate themselves to one another. Proper relationship in
marriage begins with a proper motive for the marriage. Most marriages do not
bring happiness because the contracting parties neither understand, nor
attempt to understand, the law of hypnotic rhythm, through the operation of
which every word they speak, every act in which they engage, and every
motive by which they are inspired to deal with each other is picked up and
woven into a web that entangles them in controversial misery or gives to
them the wings of freedom through which they soar above all forms of
unhappiness.
Every newly made acquaintanceship between people ripens into
friendship and then into spiritual harmony (sometimes called love) or plants a
germ of suspicion and doubt which evolves and grows into open rebellion,
according to the way in which the participants in the acquaintanceship relate
themselves to one another.
Hypnotic rhythm picks up the dominating motives, aims, purposes, and
feelings of the contacting minds and weaves these into some degree of faith
or fear, love or hatred. After the pattern has taken definite shape, as it does
with time, it is forced upon the contacting minds and made a part thereof.
In this silent way does nature make permanent the dominating factors of
every human relationship. In every human relationship the evil motives and
the evil deeds of the contacting individuals are coordinated and consolidated



into definite form and subtly woven into that all-important human trait
known as character. In the same manner, the motives and the deeds of good
are consolidated and forced upon the individual. You see, therefore, it is not
only one's deeds but also one's very thoughts which determine the nature of
all human relationships.
Q You are leading into pretty deep water. Let's keep near the shore,
where I can follow you without fear of getting beyond a safe depth. Go ahead
and tell me how this subject of human relationships actually works in the
current affairs of a problem filled world such as we have today.
A That is a happy thought. But let me make sure you understand the
principles I am telling about, before I try to show you how to apply them in
the affairs of life.
I wish to be sure you understand that the law of hypnotic rhythm is
something that no one can control, influence, or evade. But everyone can
relate himself to this law so as to benefit by its inexorable operation.
Harmonious relationship with the law consists entirely of the individual
changing his habits so they represent the circumstances and the things the
individual wants and is willing to accept.
No one can change the law of hypnotic rhythm any more than one can
change the law of gravity, but everyone can change himself. Remember,
therefore, in all the discussion of this subject that all human relationships are
made and maintained by the habits of the individuals related. The law of
hypnotic rhythm plays only the part of solidifying the factors which constitute
human relationships, but it does not create those factors. Before we go
further with the discussion of human relationships, I want you to get a clear
understanding of the subconscious mind.
The term "subconscious mind" represents a hypothetical physical organ
which has no actual existence. The mind of man consists of universal energy
(some call it Infinite Intelligence) which the individual receives, appropriates,
and organizes in definite thought forms through the network of intricate
physical apparatus known as a brain.
These thought forms are replicas of various stimuli which reach the brain
through the five commonly known physical senses and the sixth sense, which
is not so well known. When any form of stimuli reaches the brain and takes
the definite shape of thought, it is classified and stored away in a group of
the brain cells known as the memory group.



All thoughts of a similar nature are stored together so that the bringing
forth of one leads to easy contact with all its associates. The system is very
similar to the modern office filing cabinet, and it is operated in a similar
manner.
The thought impressions with which one mixes the greatest amount of
emotion (or feeling) are the dominating factors of the brain because they are
always near the surface— at the top of the filing system, so to speak— where
they spring into action voluntarily, the moment an individual neglects to
exercise self-discipline. These emotion-laden thoughts are so powerful they
often cause an individual to rush into action and indulge in deeds which have
not been submitted to or approved by his reasoning faculty. These emotional
outbursts usually destroy harmony in all human relationships. The brain often
brings together combinations of emotional feeling so powerful they
completely set aside the control of the reasoning faculty. On all such
occasions human relationships are apt to be lacking in harmony.
Through the operation of the sixth sense, the brain of a human being
may contact the filing cabinet of other brains and inspect at will whatever
thought impressions are on file there. The condition under which one person
may contact and inspect the filing cabinet of another person's brain is
generally known as harmony, but you may better understand what is meant if
I say brains attuned to the same rate of thought vibrations can easily and
quickly exercise the privilege of entering and inspecting each other's filing
cabinets of thoughts.
In addition to receiving organized thoughts from the filing cabinets of
other brains through the sixth sense, one can, through this same physical
organ, contact and receive information from the universal storehouse known
as Infinite Intelligence.
All information reaching one's brain through the sixth sense comes from
sources not easily isolated or traced; therefore, this sort of information is
generally believed to come from one's subconscious mind. The sixth sense is
the organ of the brain through which one receives all information, all
knowledge, all thought impressions which do not come through one or more
of the five physical senses.
Now that you understand how the mind operates, you will more easily
understand how and why people come to grief through improper human
relationships. You will also understand how human relationship may be made



to yield riches in their highest form, riches in material, mental, and spiritual
estates.
Moreover, you will understand there can never be happiness except
through understanding and application of the right principles of human
relationships. You will understand, too, that no individual is an entity unto
himself, that completeness of mind can be attained only by harmony of
purpose and deed between two or more minds. You will understand why
every human being should, of his own choice, become his brother's keeper in
fact as well as in theory.
Q What you say may be true, but I still insist that you have me beyond
safe depths of thought. Let us get back nearer to the shore, where I can wade
in familiar water. We shall go out into the deeper water after we learn to
swim well. We started out to discuss the subject of how to profit by
adversity, but it seems we have drifted somewhat afield from that subject.
A We have detoured, but we have not drifted. The Devil never drifts.
The detour was necessary in order that you might be prepared to understand
the most important part of this entire interview.
We are now ready to get back to the discussion of the subject of
adversity. Inasmuch as most adversities grow out of improper relationships
between people, it seems important to understand how people may become
properly related.
Naturally the question arises as to what is a proper relationship between
people? The answer is that the proper relationship is one that brings to all
connected with it, or affected by it, some form of benefit.
Q What, then, is an improper relationship?
A Any relationship between people which damages anyone or brings any
form of misery or unhappiness to any of the individuals.
Q How can improper relationships be corrected?
A By change of mind of the person causing the improper relationship, or
by changing the persons to the relationship. Some minds harmonize naturally
while others just as naturally clash. Successful human relationships, to endure
as such, must be formed of minds that naturally harmonize, quite aside from
the question of having common interests as a means of bringing them into
harmony.



When you speak of business leaders who succeed because "they know
how to pick men," you might more correctly say they succeed because they
know how to associate minds which harmonize naturally. Knowing how to pick
people successfully for any definite purpose in life is based upon ability to
recognize the types of people whose minds naturally harmonize.
Q Stay focused on adversity, if you will. If there are possible benefits to
be found through adversity, name some of them.
A Adversity relieves people of vanity and egotism. It discourages
selfishness by proving that no one can succeed without the cooperation of
others.
Adversity forces an individual to test his mental, physical, and spiritual
strength; it thus brings him face to face with his weaknesses and gives him
the opportunity to bridge them.
Adversity forces one to seek ways and means to definite ends by
meditation and introspective thought. This often leads to the discovery and
use of the sixth sense through which one may communicate with Infinite
Intelligence.
Adversity forces one to recognize the need for intelligence not available
except from sources outside of one's own mind.
Adversity breaks old habits of thought and gives one an opportunity to
form new habits; therefore, it may serve to break the hold of hypnotic
rhythm and change its operation from negative to positive ends.
Q What is the greatest benefit one may receive through adversity?
A The greatest benefit of adversity is that it may, and generally does,
force one to change one's thought-habits, thus breaking and redirecting the
force of hypnotic rhythm.
Q In other words, failure always is a blessing when it forces one to
acquire knowledge or to build habits that lead to the achievement of one's
major purpose in life. Is that correct?
A Yes, and something more! Failure is a blessing when it forces one to
depend less upon material forces and more upon spiritual forces.




Many human beings discover their "other selves," the forces which
operate through the power of thought, only after some catastrophe deprives
them of the full and free use of their physical bodies. When a man can no
longer use his hands and his feet, he usually begins to use his brain; thus he
puts himself in the way of discovering the power of his own mind.
Q What benefits may be derived from the loss of material things—
money, for example?
A The loss of material things may teach many needed lessons, none
greater, however, than the truth that man has control over nothing and has
no assurance of the permanent use of anything except his own power of
thought.
Q I wonder if this is not the greatest benefit available through adversity?
A No, the greatest potential benefit of any circumstance which causes
one to make a fresh start is that it provides an opportunity to break the grip
of hypnotic rhythm and set up a new set of thought-habits. New habits offer
the only way out for people who fail. Most people who escape from the
negative to the positive operation of the law of hypnotic rhythm do so only
because of some form of adversity which forces them to change their
thought-habits.
Q Isn't adversity apt to break one's self-reliance and cause one to give up
hope?
A It has that effect on those whose will power is weak through long
established habits of drifting. It has the opposite effect on those who have
not been weakened through drifting. The nondrifter meets with temporary
defeat and failure, but his reaction to all forms of adversity is positive. He
fights instead of giving up, and usually wins.
Life gives no one immunity against adversity, but life gives to everyone
the power of positive thought, which is sufficient to master all circumstances
of adversity and convert them into benefits. The individual is left with the
privilege of using or neglecting to use his prerogative right to think his way
through all adversities. Every individual is forced either to use his thought
power for the attainment of definite, positive ends, or by neglect or design
use this power for the attainment of negative ends. There can be no
compromise, no refusal to use the mind.



The law of hypnotic rhythm forces every individual to give some degree
of use, either negative or positive, to his mind, but it does not influence the
individual as to which use he will make of his mind.
Q Am I to understand from what you say that every adversity is a
blessing?
A No, I did not say that. I said there is the seed of an equivalent
advantage in every adversity. I did not say there was the full-blown flower of
advantage, just the seed. Usually the seed consists of some form of
knowledge, some idea or plan, or some opportunity which would not have
been available except through the change of thought-habits forced by the
adversity.
Q Are those all the benefits available to human beings through failure?
A No, failure is used by nature as a common language in which she
chastises people when they neglect to adapt themselves to her laws.
For example, the world war was man-made and destructive. Nature
planted in the circumstances of the war the seed of an equivalent reprimand
in the form of a world depression. The depression was inevitable and
inescapable. It followed the war as naturally as day follows night and by the
operation of the self-same law, the law of hypnotic rhythm.
Q Am I to understand that the law of hypnotic rhythm is the same as that
which Ralph Waldo Emerson called the law of compensation?
A The law of hypnotic rhythm is the law of compensation. It is the power
with which nature balances negative and positive forces throughout the
universes, in all forms of energy, in all forms of matter, and in all human
relationships.
Q Does the law of hypnotic rhythm operate quickly in all instances? For
example, does this law immediately bless one with the benefits of positive
application of thoughts, or curse one immediately with the results of negative
thoughts?
A The law operates definitely but not always swiftly. Both the benefits
and the penalties incurred through the law by individuals may be harvested
by others, either before or after their death.




Observe how this law works by forcing upon one generation of people the
effects of both the sins and the virtues of preceding generations. In the
operation of all of nature's laws, the fourth dimension, time, is an inexorable
factor. The length of time consumed by nature in the relation of effects to
their causes depends, in every instance, on the circumstances at hand.
Nature grows a pumpkin in three months. A good size oak tree requires a
hundred years. She converts a hen's egg into a chicken in four weeks, but she
requires nine months to convert the egg of a human being into an individual.




Chapter  Environment, Time,
Harmony and Caution
Q I now have A better understanding of the potentialities of adversity
and failure. You may go ahead, now, with your description of the next of the
seven principles. What is your next principle?
A The next principle is environmental influence.
Q Go ahead and describe the working principle of environmental
influences as a determining factor in human destinies.
A Environment consists of all the mental, spiritual, and physical forces
which affect and influence human beings.
Q What connection, if any, is there between environmental influences
and hypnotic rhythm?
A Hypnotic rhythm solidifies and makes permanent the thought-habits of
human beings. Thought-habits are stimulated by environmental influences. In
other words, the material on which thoughts are fed comes from one's
environment. Thought-habits are made permanent by hypnotic rhythm.
Q What is the most important part of one's environment, the part which
determines, more than all others, whether an individual makes positive or
negative use of his mind?
A The most important part of one's environment is that created by his
association with others. All people absorb and take over, either consciously or
unconsciously, the thought-habits of those with whom they associate closely.
Q Do you mean by this that constant association with a person whose
thought-habits are negative influences one to form negative thought-habits?
A Yes, the law of hypnotic rhythm forces every human being to form
thought-habits which harmonize with the dominating influences of his
environment, particularly that part of his environment created by his
association with other minds.
Q Then it is important that one select one's close associates with great
care?



A Yes, one's intimate associates should be chosen with as much care as
one chooses the food with which he feeds his body, with the object always of
associating with people whose dominating thoughts are positive, friendly, and
harmonious.
Q Which class of associates has the greatest influence upon one?
A One's partner in marriage and in the home and one's associates in his
occupation. After that come close friends and acquaintances. Casual
acquaintances and strangers have but little influence on one.
Q Why does one's partner in marriage have so great an influence upon
one's mind?
A Because the relationship of marriage brings people under the influence
of spiritual forces of such weight that they become dominating forces of the
mind.
Q How may environmental influences be used to break the grip of
hypnotic rhythm?
A All influences which establish thought-habits are given permanency
through the law of hypnotic rhythm. One may change the influences of his
environment so that the dominating influences are either positive or
negative, and the law of hypnotic rhythm will make them permanent, unless
they are changed through one's habits of thought.
Q Stating this truth in another way, one may submit himself to any
environmental influence desired, whether positive or negative, and the law of
hypnotic rhythm will make the influence permanent when it assumes the
magnitude of thought habit. Is that the way the law works?
A That is correct. Be careful of all forces which inspire thought; those
are the forces which constitute environment and determine the nature of
one's earthly destiny.
Q What class of people controls their environmental influences?
A The non-drifters. All who are victims of the habit of drifting forfeit
their power to choose their own environment. They become the victims of
every negative influence of their environment.




Q Is there no way out for the drifter? Is there no method by which he
may submit himself to the influence of a positive environment?
A Yes, there is a way out for drifters. They can stop drifting, take
possession of their own minds, and choose an environment which inspires
positive thought. This they may accomplish through definiteness of purpose.
Q Is that all there is to the act of eliminating the habit of drifting? Is the
habit only a state of mind?
A Drifting is nothing but a negative state of mind, a state of mind
conspicuous by its emptiness of purpose.
Q What effective procedure may one follow in establishing an
environment most helpful in developing and maintaining positive thoughthabits?
A The most effective of all environments is that which may be created by
a friendly alliance of a group of people who will obligate themselves to assist
one another in achieving the object of some definite purpose. This sort of an
alliance is known as a Master Mind. Through its operation one may associate
himself with carefully chosen individuals each of whom brings to the alliance
some knowledge, experience, education, plan, or idea suited to his needs in
carrying out the object of his definite purpose.
The most successful leaders in all walks of life avail themselves of this
sort of made-to-order environmental influence. Outstanding achievement is
impossible without the friendly cooperation of others. Stating the truth in
another way, successful people must control their environment, thereby
insuring themselves against the influence of a negative environment.
Q What of people whose duty to relatives makes it impossible for them
to avoid the influence of a negative environment?
A No human being owes another any degree of duty which robs him of his
privilege of building his thought-habits in a positive environment. On the
other hand, every human being is duty bound to himself to remove from his
environment every influence which even remotely tends to develop negative
thought-habits.
Q Isn't this a cold-blooded philosophy?




A Only the strong survive. No one can be strong without removing himself
from all influences which develop negative thought-habits. Negative thoughthabits result in the loss of the privilege of self-determination, no matter what
or who may cause those habits. Positive thought-habits may be controlled by
the individual and made to serve his aims and purposes. Negative thoughthabits control the individual and deprive him of the privilege of selfdetermination.
Q I deduce from all you have said that those who control the
environmental influences out of which their thought habits are built are
masters of their earthly destinies and that all others are mastered by earthly
destinies. Is that stating the matter correctly?
A Perfectly stated.
Q What establishes one's thought-habits?
A All habits are established because of inherent or acquired desires, or
motives. That is, habits are begun as the result of some form of definite
desire.
Q What takes place in the physical brain while one is forming thoughthabits?
A Desires are organized impulses of energy called thoughts. Desires that
are mixed with emotional feeling magnetize the brain cells in which they are
stored and prepare those cells to be taken over and directed by the law of
hypnotic rhythm. When any thought appears in the brain or is created there,
and is mixed with keen emotional feeling of desire, the law of hypnotic
rhythm begins, at once, to translate it into its physical counterpart.
Dominating thoughts, which are acted upon first by the law of hypnotic
rhythm, are those with which are mixed the strongest desires and the most
intense feelings. Thought habits are established by the repetition of the same
thoughts.
Q What are the most impelling basic motives or desires which inspire
thought action?
A The ten most common motives, those which inspire most of one's
thought-action, are these
• The desire for sex expression and love



• The desire for physical food
• The desire for spiritual, mental, and physical self-expression
• The desire for perpetuation of life after death
• The desire for power over others
• The desire for material wealth
• The desire for knowledge
• The desire to imitate others
• The desire to excel others
• The seven basic fears
These are the dominating motives which inspire the majority of all
human endeavors.
Q What about the negative desires such as greed, envy, avarice,
jealousy, anger? Are these not expressed more often than any of the positive
desires?
A All negative desires are nothing but frustrations of positive desires.
They are inspired by some form of defeat, failure, or neglect by human beings
to adapt themselves to nature's laws in a positive way.
Q That's a new slant on the subject of negative thoughts. If I correctly
understand what you have said, all negative thoughts are inspired by one's
neglect or failure to adapt oneself harmoniously to nature's laws. Is that
correct?
A That is exactly correct. Nature will not tolerate idleness or vacuums of
any sort. All space must be and is filled with something.
Everything in existence, of both a physical and a spiritual nature, must
be and is constantly in motion. The human brain is no exception. It was
created to receive, organize, specialize, and express the power of thought.
When the individual does not use the brain for the expression of positive,
creative thoughts, nature fills the vacuum by forcing the brain to act upon
negative thoughts.



There can be no idleness in the brain. Understand this principle and you
will come into a new and important understanding of the part environmental
influences take in the lives of human beings.
You will better understand, also, how the law of hypnotic rhythm
operates, it being the law which keeps everything and everyone constantly
moving through some form of expression of either negative or positive
principles.
Nature is not interested in morals as such. She is not interested in right
and wrong. She is not interested in justice and injustice. She is interested
only in forcing everything to express action according to its nature!
Q That is an enlightening interpretation of nature's ways. To whom may I
turn for corroboration of your claims?
A To men of science, to the philosophers, to all accurate thinkers.
Lastly, to the physical manifestations of nature herself.
Nature has no such thing as dead matter. Every atom of matter is
constantly in a state of motion. All energy is constantly in motion. There are
no dead voids anywhere. Time and space are literally manifestations of
motion of such swiftness that it cannot be measured by human beings.
Q Alas, one is forced to the conclusion, from what you say, that the
sources of dependable knowledge are shockingly limited.
A The developed sources of knowledge are limited. Every normal adult
human brain is a potential gateway to all the knowledge there is throughout
the universes. Every normal adult brain has within its mechanism the
possibility of direct communication with Infinite Intelligence, wherein exists
all the knowledge that is or can ever be.
Q Your statement leads me to believe that human beings may become all
they have attributed to what they call God. Is that what you mean?
A Through the law of evolution the human brain is being perfected to
communicate at will with Infinite Intelligence. The perfection will come
through organized development of the brain, through its adaptation to
nature's laws. Time is the factor which will bring perfection.
Q What causes cycles of recurring events, such as epidemics of disease,
business depressions, wars, and crime waves?



A All such epidemics in which great numbers of people are similarly
affected are caused by the law of hypnotic rhythm, through which nature
consolidates thoughts of a similar nature and causes those thoughts to be
expressed through mass action.
Q Then the Great Depression was put into motion because great numbers
of people were influenced to release thoughts of fear. Is that correct?
A Perfectly. Millions of people were endeavoring to get something for
nothing, through stock gambling. When they suddenly discovered they had
gotten nothing for something, they became frightened, rushed to their banks
to draw out their balances, and the panic was on. Through mass thought of
millions of minds, all thinking in terms of fear of poverty, the depression was
prolonged over a period of years.
Q From what you say, I deduce that nature consolidates the dominating
thoughts of people and expresses these thoughts through some form of mass
action, such as business depressions, business booms, and so on. Is that
correct?
A You have the right idea.
Q Let us now take up the next of the seven principles. Go ahead and
describe it.
A The next principle is time, the fourth dimension.
Q What relationship is there between time and the operation of the law
of hypnotic rhythm?
A Time is the law of hypnotic rhythm. The lapse of time required to give
permanency to thought-habits depends upon the object and the nature of the
thoughts.
Q But I understood you to say that the only enduring thing in nature is
change. If that is true, then time is constantly changing, rearranging, and
recombining all things, including one's thought-habits. How, then, could the
law of hypnotic rhythm give permanency to one's thought-habits?
A Time divides all thought-habits into two classes, negative thoughts and
positive thoughts. One's individual thoughts are of course constantly changing
and being recombined to suit the individual's desires, but thoughts do not



change from negative to positive or vice versa except through voluntary
effort on the part of the individual.
Time penalizes the individual for all negative thoughts and rewards him
for all positive thoughts, according to the nature and purpose of the thoughts.
If one's dominating thoughts are negative, time penalizes the individual by
building in his mind the habit of negative thinking and then proceeds to
solidify this habit into permanency every second of its existence. Positive
thoughts are, likewise, woven by time into permanent habits. The term
"permanency," of course, refers to the natural life of the individual. In the
strict sense of the term, nothing is permanent. Time converts thought-habits
into what might be called permanency during the life of the individual.
Q Now I have a better understanding of how time works. What other
characteristics has time in connection with the earthly destiny of human
beings?
A Time is nature's seasoning influence through which human experience
may be ripened into wisdom. People are not born with wisdom, but they are
born with the capacity to think, and they may, through the lapse of time,
think their way into wisdom.
Q Do youths ever possess wisdom?
A Only in very elementary matters. Wisdom comes only through the lapse
of time. It cannot be inherited and it cannot be imparted from one person to
another except through the lapse of time.
Q Does the lapse of time force an individual to acquire wisdom?
A No! Wisdom comes only to non-drifters who form positive thoughthabits as a dominating force in their lives. Drifters and those whose
dominating thoughts are negative never acquire wisdom except of a very
elementary nature.
Q From what you say, I infer that time is the friend of the person who
trains his mind to follow positive thought-habits and the enemy of the person
who drifts into negative thought habits. Is that correct?
A That is precisely true. All people can be classified as drifters and nondrifters. Drifters are always at the mercy of the nondrifters, and time makes
this relationship permanent.



Q Do you mean that if I drift along through life, without definite aim or
purpose, the non-drifter may become my master, and time only serves to give
the non-drifter a stronger and more permanent grip upon me?
A That is stating the truth exactly. Q What is wisdom?
A Wisdom is the ability to relate yourself to nature's laws so as to make
them serve you, and the ability to relate yourself to other people so as to
gain their harmonious, willing cooperation in helping you to make life yield
whatever you demand of it.
Q Then accumulated knowledge is not wisdom?
A Great heavens, no! If knowledge were wisdom, the achievements of
science would not have been converted into implements of destruction.
Q What is needed to convert knowledge into wisdom?
A Time plus the desire for wisdom. Wisdom is never thrust upon one. It is
acquired, if at all, by positive thinking, through voluntary effort!
Q Is it safe for all people to have knowledge?
A It is never safe for anyone to have extensive knowledge without
wisdom.
Q What is the age at which most people who acquire wisdom begin to
acquire it?
A The majority of people who acquire wisdom do so after they have
passed the age of forty. Prior to that time the majority of people are too busy
gathering knowledge and organizing it into plans to spend any effort seeking
wisdom.
Q What circumstance of life is most apt to lead one to acquire wisdom?
A Adversity and failure. These are nature's universal languages through
which she imparts wisdom to those who are ready to receive it.
Q Do adversity and failure always bring wisdom?
A No, only to those who are ready for wisdom and have voluntarily
sought it.



Q What determines one's readiness to receive wisdom?
A Time and the nature of one's thought-habits.
Q Is newly acquired knowledge the same as time-tested knowledge?
A No, knowledge tested through the lapse of time always is superior to
that which has been newly acquired. Time gives to knowledge definiteness in
both quality and quantity, and dependability. One never can be sure of
knowledge that has not been tested.
Q What is dependable knowledge?
A It is knowledge which harmonizes with natural law, which means that
it is based upon positive thought.
Q Does time modify and alter the values of knowledge?
A Yes, time modifies and alters all values. That which is accurate
knowledge today may become null and void tomorrow because of time's
rearrangement of facts and values. Time modifies all human relationships for
better or for worse, depending upon the policy through which people relate
themselves to one another.
In the realm of thought there is a time when it is proper to sow the seeds
of thought, and there is a proper time to reap the harvest of those thoughts,
the same as there is a time to sow and a time to reap from the soil of the
earth. Without the proper measurement of time between the sowing and the
reaping, nature modifies or withholds the rewards of the sowing.
Q Go ahead, now, and describe the last two of the seven principles.
A The next principle is harmony.
Throughout nature one may find evidences that all natural law moves in
an orderly manner, through the law of harmony. Through the operation of
this law nature forces everything within the range of a given environment to
become harmoniously related. Understand this truth and you will catch a new
and a more intriguing vision of the power of environment. You will
understand why association with negative minds is fatal to those seeking selfdetermination.
Q Do you mean that nature voluntarily forces human beings to harmonize
with the influences of their environment?



A Yes, that is true. The law of hypnotic rhythm forces upon every living
thing the dominating influences of the environment in which it exists.
Q If nature forces human beings to take on the nature of the
environment in which they live, what means of escape are available to people
who find themselves in an environment of poverty and failure but desire to
escape?
A They must change their environment or remain poverty-stricken.
Nature permits no one to escape the influences of his environment.
However, nature, in her abundance of wisdom, has given to every normal
human being the privilege of establishing his own mental, spiritual, and
physical environment, but once he establishes it he must become a part of it.
This is the inexorable working of the law of harmony.
Q In a business association, for example, who establishes the dominating
influence that determines the rhythm of the environment?
A The individual or individuals who think and act with definiteness of
purpose.
Q Is it as simple as that?
A Yes, definiteness of purpose is the starting point from which an
individual may establish his own environment.
Q I do not seem to follow your reasoning. The entire world is torn with
warfare and business depressions and other forms of strife which represent
about everything except harmony. Nature does not seem to be forcing people
to harmonize with one another. How do you explain this inconsistency? A
There is no inconsistency. The dominating influences of the world are, as you
say, negative. Very well, nature is forcing human beings to harmonize with
the dominating influences of the world environment.
Manifestations of harmony may be either positive or negative. For
example, a group of men in prison may, and they generally do, think and act
in a negative manner, but nature sees to it that the dominating influence of
the prison is impressed upon every individual in it. A group of povertystricken people in a tenement house may fight among themselves and
apparently resist all forms of harmony, but nature forces each of them to
become a part of the dominating influence of the house in which they live.



Harmony, in the sense it is here used, means that nature relates
everything throughout the universes to every other thing of a similar nature.
Negative influences are forced into association with one another, no matter
where they may be. Positive influences are just as definitely forced into
association with one another.
Q I am beginning to see why successful business leaders are so careful in
the choice of their business associates. Men who succeed in any calling
usually establish their own environment by surrounding themselves with
people who think and act in terms of success. Is that the idea?
A That is the idea exactly. Observe, with profit, that the one thing all
successful men insist upon is harmony among their business associates.
Another trait of successful people is that they move with definiteness of
purpose and insist upon their associates doing the same. Understand these
two truths and you understand the major difference between a Henry Ford
and a day laborer.
Q Now tell me about the last of the seven principles.
A The last principle is caution.
Next to the habit of drifting, the most dangerous human trait is the lack
of caution.
People drift into all sorts of hazardous circumstances because they do
not exercise caution by planning the moves they make. The drifter always
moves without exercising caution. He acts first and thinks later, if at all. He
does not choose his friends. He drifts along and allows people to attach
themselves to him on their own terms. He does not choose an occupation. He
drifts through school and is glad to get the first job that will give him food
and clothing. He invites people to cheat him at trade by neglecting to inform
himself of the rules of trade. He invites illness by neglecting to inform himself
of the rules of sound health. He invites poverty by neglecting to protect
himself against the environmental influences of the poverty-stricken. He
invites failure at every step he takes by neglecting to exercise the caution to
observe what causes people to fail. He invites fear in all its forms by his lack
of caution in examining the causes of fear. He fails in marriage because he
neglects to use caution in his choice of a mate, and he uses still less caution
in his methods of relating himself to her after marriage. He loses his friends
or converts them into enemies by his lack of caution in relating himself to
them on the proper basis.



Q Are all people lacking in caution?
A No, only those who have acquired the habit of drifting. The non-drifter
always uses caution. He carefully thinks his plans through before he begins
them. He makes allowances for the human frailties of his associates and plans
ahead to bridge them.
If he sends a messenger on an important mission, he sends someone else
to make sure the messenger does not neglect his mission. Then he checks on
both of them to be sure his wishes have been fulfilled. He takes nothing for
granted where caution provides a way to insure his success.
Q Isn't over-caution as detrimental as lack of caution?
A There is no such thing as over-caution. What you call "over caution" is
an expression of fear. Fear and caution are two entirely different things.
Q Don't people mistake fear for over-caution?
A Yes, that does sometimes happen, but the majority of people create
for themselves far more disastrous hazards by total lack of the habit of
caution than by over-caution.
Q In what way may caution be used most advantageously?
A In the selection of one's associates and in one's method of relating
oneself to associates. The reason for this is obvious.
One's associates constitute the most important part of one's
environment, and environmental influences determine whether one forms the
habit of drifting or becomes a non-drifter. The person who exercises due
caution in the choice of associates never allows himself to be closely
associated with any person who does not bring to him, through the
association, some definite mental, spiritual, or economic benefit.
Q Isn't that method of choosing associates selfish?
A It is sensible and leads to self-determination. It is the desire of every
normal person to find material success and happiness.
Nothing contributes more to one's success and happiness than carefully
chosen associates. Caution in the selection of associates becomes, therefore,
the duty of every person who wishes to become happy and successful. The
drifter allows his closest associates to attach themselves to him on their own



terms. The non-drifter carefully selects his associates and allows no one to
become closely associated with him unless that person contributes some form
of helpful influence or bestows some definite benefit.
Q It never occurred to me that caution in the selection of friends had so
definite a bearing on one's success or failure. Do all successful people
exercise caution in the selection of all their associates, whether in business,
social, or professional relationships?
A Without the exercise of caution in the choice of all associates, no one
may be certain of success in any calling. On the other hand, lack of exercise
of caution brings almost certain defeat in whatever one undertakes.

THREE THINGS connected with my interview with the Devil interest me
most. These three factors interest me because they have been the most
important influences in my own life, a fact which any reader of my story can
easily discern. The three important factors are the habit of drifting, the law
of hypnotic rhythm through which all habits are made permanent, and the
element of time.
Here is a trio of forces which hold inviolate the destinies of all men. The
three take on a new and more important meaning when they are grouped and
studied as a combined force. It takes but little imagination and scarcely any
understanding of natural laws for one to see that most of the difficulties in
which people find themselves are of their own making. Moreover, difficulties
seldom are the outgrowth of immediate circumstances. They are generally
the climax of a series of circumstances which have been consolidated through
the habit of drifting and with the aid of time.
Samuel Insull did not lose his $ billion industrial empire as the result of
the depression. He began losing it long before the depression when he
became the victim of a group of women who flattered him into turning his
talents from public utilities to grand opera. If ever a man in a high position in
the financial world went down because of the power of drifting, hypnotic
rhythm, and time, that man was Samuel Insull. I am writing from accurate
knowledge of Mr. Insull and the cause of his troubles dating from the time
that I served with him during the World War to the time of his ill-advised
attempt to run away from himself.




Henry Ford went through the same depression that swept Mr. Insull
under, but Ford came out on top without a scratch. Do you want to know the
reason? I'll tell you. Ford has the habit of not drifting on any subject. Time is
Ford's friend because he has formed the habit of using it in a positive,
constructive manner, with the aid of thoughts of his own making, woven into
plans of his own creation.
Take any circumstance you wish, measure it with reference to its
relationship to the habit of drifting, hypnotic rhythm, and time, and you may
ascertain accurately the cause of all success and all failure.
Franklin D. Roosevelt went into office with a bang during his first term.
He had but one major purpose in mind and that was very definite. It was to
stop the stampede of fear and start people to thinking and talking in terms of
business recovery instead of business depression.
In carrying out that purpose, there was no drifting. The forces of the
entire nation were consolidated and moved as one to help carry out the
President's definite purpose. For the first time in the history of America, the
newspapers of all political leanings, the churches of all denominations, the
people of all races and colors, and the political organizations of all brands
united themselves into one stupendous power for the sole purpose of helping
the President restore faith and normal business relationships in the country.
In a conference held between the President and a group of emergency
advisers a few days after he went into office, I asked him what was his major
problem. He replied, "It is not a question of majors and minors; we have but
one problem and that is to stop fear and supplant it with faith."
Before the end of his first year in office, the President had stopped fear
and supplanted it by faith, and the nation was slowly but surely on the way
out of the jungle of depression. By the end of his first term— mark well the
element of lapse of time— the President had so effectively consolidated the
forces of American business and private life that he had an entire nation in
back of him, ready, willing, and enthusiastically desirous of following his lead
no matter which way he went.
These are facts well known to everyone who reads newspapers or listens
to the radio.
Then came another presidential election and the opportunity for the
people to express their faith in their leader. They expressed it in a landslide



without precedent in American politics, and the President went into office a
second time with an almost unanimous electorate vote with only two states
meekly dissenting.
Now observe how the Wheel of Life began to reverse itself and turn back
in the other direction. The President changed his policy from definiteness of
purpose to indefiniteness and drifting.
His change of policy split the powerful labor group and turned more than
half of it against him. It split the almost-solid following he held in both
houses of Congress, and more important than all this, it split the American
people into "pro" and "anti" groups with the result that about all the President
had left of his original political assets was his million-dollar smile and his
ready handshake— obviously not enough to enable him to regain the power he
once wielded in American life.
Here, then, we have an excellent example of a man who skyrocketed to
great power through definiteness of purpose and belly-flopped to the starting
point by his habit of drifting. In both his rise and his fall can be seen clearly
the operation of the principles of drifting and non-drifting reaching a climax
through the power of hypnotic rhythm and time.
All my life the Devil had a dramatic story to tell of his dealings with me.
He saw me drift in and out of scores of business opportunities for which many
would have given a king's ransom. He saw me drifting in my policy of relating
myself to others, particularly in my lack of caution in business dealings.
The circumstance which saved me from fatal control of the law of
hypnotic rhythm was the definiteness of purpose with which, at long last, I
dedicated my entire life to the organization of a philosophy of individual
achievement. I drifted at one time or another on all my minor whims and
endeavors, but my drifting was offset by my major purpose, which was
sufficient to restore my courage and start me once more in the quest of
knowledge every time I was defeated in connection with my minor aims.
I learned something of the hazardous nature of the habit of drifting while
engaged in analyzing more than , people in connection with the
organization of the Law of Success. These analyses showed that only two out
of every  have a definite major aim in life. The other  were caught by
the habit of drifting. It seems more than a coincidence that my analyses
clearly corroborated the Devil's claim that he controls  out of every 
people because of their habit of drifting.



Looking back over my own career, I can see clearly that I could have
avoided the majority of the temporary defeats with which I met if I had been
definitely following a plan for the attainment of my major purpose in life.
From my experience in having analyzed the problems of more than ,
families, I know, definitely, that the majority of married people who get out
of harmony with each other do so because of the accumulation of a great
number of little circumstances in their married relationship which could have
been cleared up and disposed of as they arose if there had been a definite
policy to do so. They do not live their married life with definiteness of
purpose.
So the story has gone, all back down the ages. The man with the most
definite plan and purpose and the most power rides on to victory. The others
scurry for cover and get crushed under the heels of those who are more
determined.
The answer is not hard to find. There is no use looking toward high
heaven for it. For my part I would prefer to seek the answer from the Devil,
for he would tell me quickly enough that victory goes to the people who know
what they want and are determined to have it. They have mastered the habit
of drifting. They have definite policies, definite plans, and definite
objectives. Their opposition, which may outnumber them very greatly, has no
chance against them because the opposition has no plan, no purpose, no
policy except that of drifting along, hoping that something may turn up to
help them. In those three brief sentences you have the sum and the
substance of the difference between success and failure, power and lack of
it.
We come, now, near to the end of our visit through this book. If we were
to try to state in one brief sentence the most important part of that which I
have tried to convey through the book, it would be something like this
One's dominating desires can be crystallized into their physical
equivalents through definiteness of purpose backed by definiteness of plans,
with the aid of nature's law of hypnotic rhythm and time!
There you have the positive phase of the philosophy of individual
achievement I have tried to describe through this book, brought down to an
irreducible minimum of brevity and simplicity. If you expand the philosophy
for the purpose of adapting it to the circumstances of life, you find that it is



as broad as life itself, that it covers all human relationships, all human
thoughts, aims, and desires.
So here we are, at the end of the strangest of all the thousands of
interviews I have had with the great and the neargreat, over a period of fifty
years of labor, in my search for the truths of life that lead to happiness and
economic security.
How strange, indeed, that after having had active cooperation from such
men as Carnegie, Edison, and Ford, I should have been compelled, finally, to
go to the Devil for a working knowledge of the greatest of all the principles
uncovered in my quest for truth. How strange that I was forced to experience
poverty and failure and adversity in a hundred forms before being given the
privilege of understanding and using a law of nature which softens the thrust
of these wicked weapons or wipes them out altogether. But the strangest of
all this dramatic experience which life has provided me is the simplicity of
the law through which, if I had understood it, I could have transmuted my
desires into substantial form without having to undergo so many years of
hardship and misery.
I find now, at the end of my interview with the Devil, that I had been
carrying in my own pockets the matches with which the fires of adversity
were being touched off. And I find, too, that the water with which those fires
were finally extinguished was at my command in great abundance.
I searched for the philosopher's lodestone with which failure may be
converted into success, only to learn that both success and failure are the
results of day-to-day evolutionary forces through which dominating thoughts
are pieced together bit by bit and woven into the things we want or the
things we do not want, according to the nature of those thoughts.
How unfortunate that I did not understand this truth from the time that I
reached the age of reason, for if I had understood it then I might have been
able to go around some of the hurdles I have been forced to jump as I walked
through "The Valley of the Shadow" of life.
The story of my interview with the Devil is now in your hands. The
benefits you will receive from it will be in exact proportion to the thought it
inspires in you. To benefit from reading the interview, you need not agree
with every portion of it.




You have only to think and to reach your own conclusions concerning
every part of it. How reasonable that is. You are the judge and the jury and
the attorney for both the prosecution and the defense. If you do not win your
case, the loss and the cause thereof will be yours!
—Napoleon Hill

